









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Technological Forecasting & Social Change


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore


Analysing acculturation to sustainable food consumption behaviour in the
social media through the lens of information diffusion


Sonal Choudharya, Rakesh Nayakb,c,⁎, Sushma Kumaric, Homagni Choudhuryd


a Sheffield University Management School, University of Sheffield, Conduit Road, Sheffield S10 1FL, UK
b LeanSig Limited, Sheffield S20 2PD, UK
cHull University Business School, University of Hull, Cottingham Road, Hull HU6 7XR, UK
d Department of Economics, School of Law, Social and Behavioural Sciences, Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, Kingston University, UK


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Acculturation
Social media
Information diffusion
Sustainable behaviour
Food consumption


A B S T R A C T


Drawing on theories of acculturation and information diffusion, this paper examines whether social media usage,
intergroup contacts and information dissemination influence the cultural adaptation of three ethnic groups, and
its implications on sustainable consumption behaviour. Twenty-four semi-structured interviews containing
multiple dimensions of social media uses, acculturation, food consumption behaviour, and information diffusion
were administered to a sample of Indians (living in the home country), British Indians (living in the host country
for more than 10 years) and White British (natives of Britain) users of social media. Our findings suggest that
there is a clear link between the integrated strategy of acculturation and information diffusion on social media,
which influences acculturation to sustainable food consumption behaviour among social media users.
Managerial implications of this research finding are that intervention in information diffusion aids acculturation
through the social media, which serves to infuse social media and sustainability strategist with knowledge to best
influence the consumers in developing sustainable food consumption behaviour. This research also identifies
opportunities to expand this academic research and contribute further to the theories of remote acculturation on
which limited research has been done.


1. Introduction


The theory of acculturation, envisaged initially in the fields of so-
ciology and anthropology in early 20th century (Park and Burgess,
1921; Redfield et al., 1936), often explains intricacies of the process
involved in people to people (or migrants) interactions from diverse
cultural backgrounds when subjected to continuous contact with each
other. Based on their perspective towards their own and new cultural
contexts (Berry, 1980, 1997), some of the migrants opt to adopt from
the acculturation strategies of assimilation, integration, segregation or
marginalisation. Some, for instance, go for “integration” by maintaining
ties to their own cultures while adopting some practices and beliefs of
the new culture. However, the acculturation processes appear to be
complex and have often been addressed unclear and inconsistent ways
within the literature (Berry and Sam, 1997).


While most of the acculturation theories primarily focus on physical
movement of migrants, there is a vacuum of studies that address the
emergence of virtual acculturation aided by cross cultural integration
over social media and facilitated by increasing information


dissemination. Immigration of people from one country to another,
either permanently or temporarily, gradually exposes them to different
cultures, food, clothes and customs. While socialisation facilitates
learning of nuances of the culture one grows in, acculturation entails
the interaction of at least two cultures, aiding the process of adaptation
and assimilation of the person to the values and standards of a new
culture (Mendoza, 1989; Rudmin, 2003). Physical migration exposes
migrants to an obscure process of adaptation to unknown physical,
biological (food, health), economic, social, and cultural conditions
often creating consequential psychological stress among such migrants
(Simons, 1901; Tajfel and Turner, 1986; Berry and Sam, 1997; Marsh
and Sahin-Dikmen, 2002; Luedicke, 2011). However, with the emer-
gence of Internet and increasing use of social media, migration is no
longer a precondition for people to coalesce with people from other
lifestyles, food habits, professions, political views, religiosities, ethni-
cities and ideologies. Social media and Internet platforms can increase
exposure of non-migrants to diverse cultures in which they have never
lived thus aiding in remote acculturation (Ferguson and Bornstein,
2012). In their study, Ferguson and Bornstein (2012) explain remote


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.009
Received 3 December 2017; Received in revised form 27 September 2018; Accepted 12 October 2018


⁎ Corresponding author at: LeanSig Limited, Sheffield S20 2PD, UK.
E-mail address: rakesh@leansig.co.uk (R. Nayak).


Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


Available online 30 October 2018
0040-1625/ Crown Copyright © 2018 Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00401625

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.009

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.009

mailto:rakesh@leansig.co.uk

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.009

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.009&domain=pdf




acculturation as a new form of acculturation that can occur by dis-
continuous and/or indirect interaction between two historically and
geographically separated cultures through emerging mechanisms of
globalisation such as social media.


Although, the degree of convenience and reachability provided by
social media platforms in assimilation, integration or acculturation may
not always be homogenous, the fact is that it facilitates engagement
between groups that share similar values and beliefs regardless of
geographical distance (Phillips, 2008). Bjork and Magnusson (2009)
state that an individual with high number of social contacts is more
likely to generate new ideas by embracing, processing and embarking
upon new information. In this way the social media facilitates in-
formation diffusion, which is a process how certain information or
knowledge is disseminated and reaches individuals through interac-
tions on social media (Zafarani et al., 2014). However, there is limited
research that explores such relationship.


Where culture is seen as a learned experience acquired by in-
dividuals in the course of interacting with others, it incorporates me-
chanisms for change while preserving traditions such as food habits or
consumptions. Food habits, which are basically predictable and stable,
are part of this dynamic process that paradoxically undergoes con-
tinuous and constant evolution (Fieldhouse, 1995). Being a cultural
symbol (Verbeke and Lo ́pez, 2005), food is one of the important cul-
tural attributes that humans start learning from childhood and resist to
change their food habits at an older age (Cervellon and Dube ́, 2005).
While existing literature has primarily focused on traditional ac-
culturation theories, there is no attempt, in our knowledge, that links
the appropriation of social media to its influence on remote ac-
culturation to sustainable food habits.


Food being such an important part of the acculturation process, this
study explores whether social media, through information diffusion, is
able to influence the behaviour of consumers towards acculturation to
sustainable consumption of food, thereby encouraging consumption of
healthy food as well as reduction of food waste in the household.
Therefore, exploring how consumers could be influenced or driven to-
wards sustainable consumption behaviour can be closely associated
with one of the important areas of research in food security.


In this paper we undertake semi-structured interviews of twenty-
four social media users to understand how information diffusion on
social media related to cooking, eating habits, storage, preservation,
consumption, new recipes, food technology and recycling facilitates
acculturation to sustainable consumption behaviour. We study three
groups of respondents – Indians (living in the home country), British
Indians (living in the host country for more than 10 years) and white
British (natives of Britain) – to understand how the rampant use of
social media enables exchange of information related to food and create
enough awareness to share and adopt best possible behaviour with a
potential to reduce food waste. Our sample for analysis consists of three
distinct groups and we assess the manifestations of their acculturation
process, which is influenced by information diffusion on social media. It
helps us to further explore issues related to sustainable consumption
behaviour among the food consumers.


Rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a re-
view of the literature on traditional acculturation studies highlighting
the importance of food in those studies, which in turn enables us to
identify the research gaps in the literature and specific research ques-
tions to achieve the broader aims of the paper. Section 3 describes the
research design and methodology used to answer the research questions
stated in the preceding section. Section 4 presents our analysis along
with a detailed discussion of the results, emphasising the contribution
of this paper to the literature as well as the wider industry and policy
analysts. We conclude in Section 5 summarising the key findings, our
contribution to knowledge and practice and outline the future research
direction originating from the research limitations.


2. Literature review


2.1. Ethnic identity and traditional acculturation


Many previous studies have viewed ethnic identity and accultura-
tion as two interdependent concocts that drive consumer acculturation
and behaviour (Persky and Birman, 2005; Penaloza, 1994a: Penaloza,
1995; Phinney et al., 2001). These studies suggest that when consumers
have a strong ethnic identity, they will be less acculturated to the new
cultural environment compared to consumers whose ethnic identity is
weak. Ethnic-identity is termed as identification with a group, which is
distinguished by religion, colour, language, clothes, food habits or some
other attributes that are common (Maldonado and Patriya, 1999).
Appiah (2001) states that ethnic identity could be distinguished from
an individual's behaviour and attitude that are synonymous with their
core cultural values. This identity often comprises of language, religion,
food, customs, dress, product use and media use among others.


Redfield et al. (1936) originally defined acculturation as “those
phenomena, which result when groups of individuals having different cul-
tures come into continuous first-hand contact with subsequent changes in the
original culture patterns of either or both groups” (p. 149). Similarly, Berry
(2005) defines acculturation as “the dual process of cultural and psy-
chological change that takes place as a result of contact between two or more
cultural groups and their individual members” (p. 698). The above defi-
nitions comprehend that acculturation emerges when one experiences
cross-cultural contact due to physical migration from one geographical
location to another, and we refer to this as traditional acculturation in
the context of our research. However, in a highly globalised world, we
cannot restrict “contact” to primarily physical contact, for instance,
contact can also be made through social media platforms.


2.1.1. Acculturation outcomes and strategies
Previous research on traditional acculturation highlights that in-


dividuals experience varying degrees of acculturative stress such as
depression, identity confusion, anxiety and feelings of being margin-
alized when different cultural groups interact (Berry et al., 1987;
Forbush and Foucault-Welles, 2016). In order to respond to such ac-
culturative stress, individuals choose different acculturation strategies,
which are also referred as acculturation outcomes in the literature
(Berry, 2005; Berry, 2008; Cappellini and Yen, 2013; Forbush and
Foucault-Welles, 2016). Berry (2008) described four responses of in-
dividuals (immigrants) undergoing acculturation such as: (i) Assimila-
tion, where immigrants adopt the dominant new culture and abandon
their original one, (ii) Integration, where they embrace both new and old
cultures, (iii) Separation, where they withdraw from the new culture
and maintain their original one or (iv) Marginalisation, where they en-
tail a withdrawal from both cultures (Berry, 2008). A four-pattern ty-
pology of acculturation was also proposed by Mendoza and Martinez Jr.
(1981), of which three of those corresponded to Berry's patterns: ‘cul-
tural shift’ (analogous to assimilation), ‘cultural incorporation’ (in-
tegration), ‘cultural resistance’ (similar to separation), and ‘cultural
transmutation’ (can be similar to marginalisation where a modification
of native and alternative cultural norms create a unique subcultural
entity).


Research on such different acculturation outcomes is predominantly
seen in the area of consumer research, where existing studies have
looked at how consumption of specific items, such as food (Cappellini
and Yen, 2013; Laroche et al., 2005), media and clothing (Lee and Tse,
1994), demonstrate immigrants' relations with their ethnic and host
culture (Rossiter and Chan, 1998). There is still an on-going debate in
the literature regarding whether or not consumers or immigrants adapt
to the host culture. Many of them suggest that generally the immigrants
select and adopt aspects from both cultures, resulting in an integrated
acculturation outcome (Askegaard et al., 2005; Oswald, 1999;
Penaloza, 1994a). An exception is the study by Ustuner and Holt
(2007), which demonstrates outcomes of acculturation as either


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


482






separation, where immigrants continue to maintain their original iden-
tity through everyday consumption practices and they pursue the
dominant culture through mainstream market opportunities, or mar-
ginalisation, where they “give up on both pursuits, resulting in a shat-
tered identity project.” However, these acculturation outcomes could
differ based on different ethnic groups, their age, gender, profession
and mode of contact with the host. Very few studies have studied the
influence of such factors on acculturation process, focusing mostly on
minorities after migration.


2.1.2. Factors influencing acculturation outcome
Factors that facilitate or oppose the acculturation outcomes may


differ based on immigrants' social relations, their antecedent variables,
and global consumer culture (Cappellini and Yen, 2013; Cleveland
et al., 2009; Penaloza, 1994b). Antecedent variables, such as age, lan-
guage ability, religion, gender, employment status, time of arrival/re-
cency of migration and ethnic identity play a substantial role in influ-
encing the acculturation process (Penaloza, 1994b). Penaloza (1994b;
p49). It highlights “family, friends, media, retail businesses, schools,
and churches” as some of the influencing factors affecting the ac-
culturation process. The reason being that they represent lifestyles,
values, norms as well as objects and consumer practices of both home
and host culture (Cappellini and Yen, 2013).


Cleveland and Chang (2009) also highlighted that the relationship
of immigrants with home and host culture members can influence as
well as re-shape their consumption choices. Social relations can be
conceptualised as strong ties (e.g. close friends) and weak ties (e.g.
acquaintances) (Granovetter, 1983). Other studies have also shown the
importance of social networks during different transitions (Caligiuri
and Lazarova, 2002; Forbush and Foucault-Welles, 2016). Chung and
Fischer (1999) demonstrated that different ties influence consumption
in different ways, for instance strong ties have a more influence over
individual consumption compared to weak ties.


Askegaard et al. (2005) highlighted that global consumer culture
could be another factor that influences the acculturation process.
Owing to globalisation, consumer culture is not anymore associated
with a single country. It has rather become synonymous with multi-
polar consumerism representing many national cultures. Berry (2008)
also suggests that global consumer culture has become such an im-
portant part of people's everyday life that it could be a “starting point of
acculturation.” However, it is not evident how social relations on online
platforms and availability of variety of information on different culture
affect the acculturation outcomes and individual consumption.


2.1.3. Remote acculturation vs. conventional acculturation
There are four major acculturation strategies; assimilation, in-


tegration, separation and marginalisation, which explains the conven-
tional for of acculturation (Berry, 1980).


This research along with other scholarly literature have primarily
focussed on migration research dimension of the acculturation covering
inter-cultural contacts and inter-social group contacts mostly within a
host-migrant set up. However, rapid globalisation fuelled by disruptive
technologies and multipolarity in the world order have facilitated
multidirectional flow of people, ideas and goods across the countries
and cultures (Jensen et al., 2011). This has instigated new ways of in-
tergroup and intercultural interactions outside the purview of migra-
tion and opened avenues for a new form of acculturation called remote
acculturation. While the conventional acculturation requires first-hand
contacts ((Redfield et al., 1936), remote acculturation offers endless
possibilities for culturally different individuals or groups to interact
through social media. Dey et al. (2018) further support this with ar-
guments that the use of social media is helping to diminish the gap
between our real and virtual life by depicting more tangible aspects of
our real life through our clothes and fashions as well as how they look,
their location and other physical evidences. While the remote ac-
culturation, facilitated by the globalisation mechanisms, brings food,


goods and culture closer between different countries and cultures, the
subject still remains understudied mainly due to its vast influence as
well as correlation with rampant growth of social media technologies.


2.2. Acculturation and food consumption


Traditional acculturation studies show how people associate food to
their culture and ethnic identity more than clothes in their everyday
practices, and how their food choices are more or less resistant to
change (Cleveland et al., 2009; Penaloza, 1994b; Ustuner and Holt,
2007). Food habits are inculcated early in life and are perpetuated
throughout the life because they are considered as symbolically
meaningful behaviours for a given culture (Cleveland et al., 2009;
Fieldhouse, 1995). Furthermore, food is considered as an important
constituent that serves as a key expression of culture. Any study in-
volving acculturation analysis would look incomplete without paying
attention to nuances of food consumption.


The resistant to change (or separation) is seen more with minorities
with strong ethnic ties in multi-cultural environment where there is an
internal drive to protect one's ethnic identity and culture (Cappellini
and Yen, 2013). Such separations are more prominent in some ethic
groups than others. For example, Chung (2000) discussed that Chinese
immigrants demonstrate strong ethnic retention related to food con-
sumption when compared with other minority groups. Vieregge et al.
(2009) also showed that second and even third generation of Chinese
immigrants living in Switzerland consumed Chinese food daily at home
as well as preferred Chinese restaurants over others as an option while
eating out. Such high level of acculturation separation from western
cuisine seen in Chinese population has been associated with food-cen-
tered culture where food plays a very significant role in Chinese life
(Simmons, 1991). Similarly, Uhle and Grivetti (1993) compared ethnic
Swiss living in Brazil and Switzerland and revealed that Brazilian Swiss
preserved many of their traditional food practices even after more than
a century of being geographically and culturally separated from their
homeland. In contrast, Cleveland et al. (2009) through a structured
equation modelling, suggested that relationship between consumption
behaviour, ethnic identity and acculturation is far more complex and
specific to a given food category and culture. However, most of these
existing studies examining issues related to acculturation have been
focussed on a narrow group of immigrants, who are minorities in the
host country, leaving out other groups within the host country popu-
lation, who may be exposed to different cultures through other means
of communication such as Internet and social media.


2.2.1. Sustainable food consumption
Sustainable consumption aims to reduce the resource intensity of


production-consumption systems i.e. focus is on consuming less re-
sources (Evans, 2011). It can be traced back to the 1992 Rio Earth
Summit where environmental impacts of consumption patterns in in-
dustrialised countries were highlighted. This was soon followed by es-
tablishing a strategic priority of “transforming unsustainable patterns of
consumption in 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg” (Evans, 2011). “Sustainable Consumption and Produc-
tion (SCP)” was identified as one of its three overarching objectives and
a 10-year framework of programmes (10YFP) on SCP was developed for
implementing SCP objectives (Evans et al., 2017). SCP plan of im-
plementation clearly distinguished between sustainable production and
sustainable consumption, the latter being more associated with re-
sponsibilities of consuming subjects which can be further broken down
into ‘consumer attitude’, ‘consumer behaviour’ and ‘consumer choice’
(Evans et al., 2017). The recent Sustainable Development Goals (SDG
12) also aims to safeguard sustainable consumption and production
patterns in food systems.


In the context of sustainable food consumption, consumption of
organic food or local food can fall under this category as they use less
resources during production phase, e.g. no artificial fertiliser or


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


483






pesticide input in organic production system, less food miles in local
food consumption and at the same time such food are more nutritious
and healthy (Lucia et al., 2017). Focus of sustainable food consumption
also extends beyond production types and covers reduction in food
waste (Evans et al., 2017). Most of the previous research has pre-
dominantly focused on individual consumers attitude, behaviour or
choice (Hughner et al., 2007; Jackson, 2005). Effect of culture, context,
technology and available infrastructure in a given society that influ-
ences consumers' choices has not been extensively covered.


Preparation and consumption of food, also known as foodways,
facilitates interactions within a community on a variety of levels and in
many ways by giving useful insights into the people who perform these
acts (Ishak et al., 2013). The media is believed to encourage sharing of
various ethnic foods through foodways (Ishak et al., 2013). Therefore,
the understanding consumer choices and impact of culture, technology
and (remote) acculturation in the given context and society becomes
important for addressing sustainable food consumption goals.


2.3. Acculturation and information diffusion on social media


Despite previous findings stating acculturation to be a two-way
process of change, it has primarily concentrated on the process of
adaption of a host culture, customs or traditions by minorities such as
immigrants while coming in contact with the dominant majority. In an
era of globalisation, the need of physical contact is not necessary to
foster the changes in individuals. The emerging forces of technology
and trade now enable cultural exchange in absence of direct and con-
tinuous contact that often associates with population migration. This
modern type of (remote) acculturation involves indirect and/or
sporadic contact between the groups that are geographically separated.
(Ferguson and Bornstein, 2012). How people respond to their contact
with other cultures without physically migrating, as a minority in the
host country, remains highly unexplored in the literature (Kizgin et al.,
2018; Li and Tsai, 2015). Internet is one of the outcomes of globalisa-
tion, which has facilitated users across the globe to be in contact with
each other and create and exchange the content without physically
migrating. Social media has emerged to become one of the prominent
forces that aid cultural adaptation or acculturation process (Chen et al.,
2008; Croucher, 2011; Tufekci, 2008). Social media users are now able
to widen their social networks and get connected to new information
and ideas, which were inaccessible to them earlier (Kizgin et al., 2018;
Leonardi, 2014; Treem and Leonardi, 2012). Moreover, a recent study
(Miller, 2016) argues that we should never consider social media as a
place or world separated or different from our ordinary life as it has
become a place where we live and where everyday life happens. From
the purview of anthropology, and with the influence on anthropological
bias, social media is arguably bringing the world little closer (Miller,
2016). This study perceives the influence of the social media in terms of
content or information and not merely as a platform for information
dissemination. This makes this study imperative and novel in its own
way to throw light on virtual or remote acculturation that is influenced
by social media usage. Clearly, the aim is not to contradict the existing
studies of traditional acculturation but to widen the knowledge on the
evolving nature of acculturation.


Online social networks now have become a platform where hun-
dreds of millions of Internet users create, distribute and consume user-
generated content. While social media has increased the accessibility to
infinite source of information in an unparalleled scale, it plays a vital
role in the process of information diffusion by enhancing the exchange
of information and diverse perspectives (Geetika et al., 2014). As stated
by many previous studies, there seems to be a correlation between node
characteristic and the information diffusion in terms of velocity of the
message and magnitude of spread – for an example information shared
by highly active users of social networks gets viral quickly than inactive
or less active users (Henry et al., 2017; Yang and Counts, 2010).


Ascertaining the most influential information disseminators in


social media networks is imperative for monitoring and controlling
efficient diffusion of information (Guille et al., 2013). Which means a
social media campaign can extract more benefits by targeting influen-
cers who can help in triggering information cascade for further adop-
tion by online users. While many studies have developed numerous
models and techniques on information diffusion in social networks
(Guille et al., 2013), no previous research has focused on how in-
formation diffusion can help in acculturation of sustainable consump-
tion behaviour among the social media users.


The preceding discussion leaves a substantial scope in studying how
spread of information on social media help in acculturation to sus-
tainable consumption behaviour – mainly focusing on food consump-
tion.


2.4. Key research gaps and research questions


The literature review reveals that there are a number of studies that
have covered traditional acculturation, however, little or no research
was found, which clearly explained the influence of social media in the
acculturation process of non-immigrants. While “remote acculturation”
(Ferguson and Bornstein, 2012) mainly addresses the cultural exchange
remotely, there is a dearth of research that needs to explain how “re-
mote acculturation” is influenced by information diffusion on social
media (Li and Tsai, 2015) and what role it plays in food acculturation or
acculturation to sustainable food consumption behaviour. Such under-
standing will also help in addressing some of the food security objec-
tives and sustainable development goals - SDG 12, such as changing
consumer behaviour towards making a more sustainable choice and
reducing food waste. On the basis of these, this study derives four main
research questions as below;


RQ1: In what ways social media influence acculturation?
RQ2: How does social media influence food acculturation?
RQ3: What are the drivers and barriers to food acculturation on


social media?
RQ4: How information diffusion on social media impacts ac-


culturation to sustainable food consumption behaviour?


3. Research methodology


This research undertakes an in-depth qualitative research metho-
dology. As the research aims to understand how social media, through
information diffusion, influences acculturation rather than how many
feel influenced, a qualitative approach seems to be more suitable for the
nature of questions being asked (Silverman, 2013). The real motive to
select this method was the diligence and wholeness of the data collected
through qualitative methods that allows any inconsistencies and irre-
gularity to be captured (Holloway and Wheeler, 2010; Saunders et al.,
2009). This sense of comprehensiveness in data also helps in effectively
establishing the context surrounding the observations (Cassell et al.,
2006; Miles et al., 2014).


The analysis was aimed at examining the influence of social media
on individuals' food consumption behaviour within ethnic group set-
tings. The study considered using interpretivism for this research be-
cause interpretivist paradigm focuses on understanding “the world of
human experience” (Cohen and Manion, 1994: p36). Cresswell (2003)
and Yanow and Schwartz-Shea (2011) also argue that interpretivist
researchers discover reality through participant's views, their own
background and experiences. The chosen method purely aligned with
the study's primary research goal to understand participants' view on
social media, information dissemination and influence of consumption
behaviour through investigators' expertise around the topic.


3.1. Data collection


Semi-structured interviews were conducted to collect data from the
respondents as they provide an appropriate method to gain authentic


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


484






information about their social media experiences (Scott and Morrison,
2007). It provides the flexibility to investigate some of the questions in
detail as well as skip or omit questions where appropriate, but generally
follows a pre-determined list of questions (Saunders et al., 2009).
Furthermore, such interview format offers the respondents a sense of
informality due to a conversational tone (Eriksson and Kovalainen,
2008). Limitations such as researcher's biasness as well as participants'
reluctance to be completely honest to a stranger (Salkind, 2006) were
addressed through opportunities created by the interviewers for cap-
turing extemporaneous conversation, covering themes that were con-
sidered important to concerned respondents (Mason, 2002).


Mixed purposeful sampling technique was used to interview parti-
cipants who were social media users geographically resident in India
and United Kingdom. This technique was selected because it combines
two or more sampling strategies for deriving evidences to achieve the
objectives of the study by facilitating triangulation and flexibility in
meeting the needs of different stakeholders (Patton, 2002; Suri, 2011).
In this case it involved maximum variation sampling and random
sampling to increase the credibility of the results. Following the study
by Brewer (2000), ethical standards were maintained, and all re-
spondents were explained that their involvement was purely voluntary.
Information sheet was provided to all the participants well before the
interview process and an informed consent was obtained before the
interview.


3.1.1. Interview protocol
Twenty-four respondents were interviewed based on the demo-


graphics, heterogeneity and amount of exposure to social media. They
comprised of eight from each group of: (1) Indians (living in the home
country); (2) British Indians (living in the host country for more than
10 years); and (3) white British (natives of Britain). White British were
selected because they constitute 82% of the UK total population ac-
cording to census 2011. British Indians with a length of more than
10 years stay in the United Kingdom was considered because many
previous studies (Kuo and Roysircar, 2004; Fosset, 2006; Besevegis and
Pavlopoulos, 2008) have positively associated acculturation with length
of stay in the host countries. The study by Kuo and Roysircar (2004)
found that migrants who had stayed longer in a host country had more
acculturation advantages. Although, none of the previous studies re-
searched acculturation in the context of food consumption behaviour
and social media usage, some of them have associated positivity to-
wards the host culture with the length of stay in a foreign culture
(Cortes, Rogler and Malgady, 1994). Similarly, Ward and Kennedy
(1994) and Liebkind (2001) reason that any sociocultural integration is
largely influenced by one of the factors such as length of stay in that
culture. Moreover, a study by Miglietta and Tartaglia (2008) found that
length of stay is one of the factors that might be needed for acquisition
of cultural acquaintance, which in turn, may be increased by the con-
sumption of mass media. Furthermore, a study to understand correla-
tion between the length of stay and cultural integration among migrants
in Greece revealed that the percentage of cultural integration increased
over the duration of stay (from 31% for 1–5 years of stay to 52% for
more than 10 years of stay).


The respondents were interviewed both face to face as well as using
web as a platform based on their preferences and geographical loca-
tions. Initially, participants were interviewed once. However, based on
the transcripts, follow up interviews were also conducted. Face to face
interviews were conducted within ideal surroundings, where re-
spondents were made comfortable, as comfort of interviewee is con-
sidered an important constituent of a successful interview (Mason,
2002). Interviews focussed on four key themes, which were: (1) social
media's influence acculturation; (2) social media's influence on food
acculturation; (3) drivers and barriers to food acculturation on social
media; (4) and how/whether information diffusion on social media aids
acculturation to sustainable food consumption behaviour? Interview
themes were also explained to the participants in the context of the


study being interested in understanding the experience, drivers, bar-
riers, and synergies of an individual in order to study their experience of
a new food culture and to what extend social media plays a role in it
(see Appendix 1). Each of the interviews lasted approximately
60–90min with an aim to collect views and experience of the partici-
pants around social media usage and its influence on food accultura-
tion.


3.1.2. Demographic details of interviewees
Culture is considered to have the most reflective influence on con-


sumer behaviour (Askegaard et al., 2005; Cleveland and Laroche,
2007). Therefore, three groups of participants were selected that re-
presented cultural diversities. Selecting the three groups of participants
i.e. Indians (living in the home country), British Indians (living in the
host country for more than 10 years), and white British (natives of
Britain), was aimed at understanding how individuals and groups in-
tegrate and/or switch between multiple cultural narratives without
physically travelling or having face-to-face interactions too often. To
avoid gender bias participants consisted of 12 females and 12 males
with the youngest one at 21 years and the oldest at 66. They are mostly
from cities with facilities of broadband or mobile broadband connec-
tions. There were 10 participants in the age group of 21–30, five in the
age group of 31–40, two in the age group of 41–50, three in the age
group of 51–60, and four in the age group of 61–69 (see Table 1). Their
length of experience in social media usage ranged from one year to
9 years, whereas educational qualifications ranged from undergraduate
to doctoral degrees.


3.2. Data analysis


The data collected from the participants were analysed using a
template analysis, which features coding that evolves throughout the
analysis, helping identify any emerging thematic relationships (King,
2004). The study employed the process of hybrid coding (both pre-set
and open) in NVivo software. A deductive approach was followed in the
prior development of themes, which allowed the researchers to derive a
list of pre-set codes from the literature review, before beginning the
data collection process (King, 2004). As the analysis of transcripts
progressed, an inductive approach of open coding was followed to
conceptualise, compare, and categorise data by using a repetitive


Table 1
Demographic details of the interviewees.


Nationality Code Gender Age Residence SM use (yrs) Education


British BR1 F 25 UK 6 UG
BR2 M 33 UK 8 PG+
BR3 M 60 UK 3 PG
BR4 F 40 UK 7 UG
BR5 M 21 UK 5 UG
BR6 F 26 UK 7 PG+
BR7 F 63 UK 1 PG+
BR8 M 44 UK 8 UG


Indian IN1 M 55 India 2 PG
IN2 M 30 India 6 PG
IN3 F 26 India 7 PG
IN4 F 38 India 4 PG+
IN5 F 57 India 1 PG
IN6 F 28 India 6 UG
IN7 M 22 India 3 UG
IN8 M 62 India 2 UG


British Indian BI1 F 21 UK 7 UG
BI2 F 28 UK 8 PG
BI3 M 35 UK 8 PG
BI4 F 26 UK 6 UG
BI5 M 42 UK 6 UG
BI6 M 37 UK 9 PG+
BI7 M 61 UK 3 UG
BI8 F 66 UK 2 PG


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


485






process to define and examine relations among different categories in
the dataset (Strauss, 1987; Strauss and Corbin, 1990). Such approach
allowed the researchers to revise templates, modify or eliminate codes
whether necessary and allowed new themes to emerge. The engage-
ment with respondents was emphasised from initial contact to facilitate
their preparedness to reveal and share their perceptions and experi-
ences regarding various aspects of the research. Then the study in-
volved building a consensus to review, revise, and finalise categories to
define overarching themes.


4. Analysis


4.1. Traditional acculturation vs. acculturation in social media


Following Berry (2008), we consider acculturation as a multifaceted
process that may not always lead to assimilation of the host culture, and
definitely not a linear process leading to a melting pot (Penaloza,
1994b). It states that the process of acculturation can possibly lead to
various outcomes such as assimilation (when immigrants adopt host
culture and leave their original culture), integration (adopt both new
and original cultures), separation (withdraw from the host culture and
continue with their original culture) and marginalisation (when they
withdraw from both the cultures). However, analysing the data based
on the semi-structured interviews reflect that the trait of margin-
alisation was missing from the acculturation on social media, owing to
the nature of acculturation that perceived to be purely voluntary. While
traditional acculturation theories reflected ‘external push’ (Hartwell
et al., 2011) among the immigrants, majority of participants in this
study demonstrated ‘internal pull’, which also means that social media
facilitates the exchange of information without compelling any online
users to acculturate. Most importantly, respondents did not show any
sign of stress or negative emotions as compared to immigrants as stated
in previous studies (Croucher, 2008; Kramer, 2003). Three key themes
that emerged out of our analysis are explained below. The results of this
study reveal that respondents often acted rational as well as opportu-
nists without the sense of any obligation to conveniently choose cul-
tural attributes that suited their expectations and living standards
within a multicultural ambience. The majority of the respondents
mainly exhibited the sign of ‘integration’ (Berry, 2008) to keep the
amalgamation of both the ancestral and the host culture. Furthermore,
their interaction in the multicultural environment was not driven by
influences, but rather by expectations defined by a given context.


4.2. Influence of social media on acculturation


All the participants interviewed were users of social media plat-
forms. They primarily used social media to view multimedia content,
initiate conversations, and exchange information that could help them
in making new contacts and learning about new cultures, traditions,
food, and customs. In addition to communicating with social contacts,
they also used social media to browse third party contents related to
diverse topics with a hope that it would render an inconspicuous means
of connecting with new people, cultural groups, and learn more about
them.


“I am unable to travel to explore new countries and meet with people to
learn new cultures, new food, and new customs. Therefore, I have be-
come a member of many intercultural groups on social media where I
learn all things without requiring travelling. The best part of learning
about and trying out new cultures on social media is that we have the full
freedom to choose what we want. For example, we are not forced to eat
different food or wear different clothes and the prerogatives of having or
not falls on us”.


(Respondent IN4)


Irrespective of the ethnic background, respondents between 21 and
40 years of age appeared to be more likely to adapt new cultures and


customs whereas their counterparts above 55 years of age showed re-
luctance to embrace new cultures, customs and food. While most of the
respondents agreed that social media plays an important role in helping
them to learn and adapt new cultures, three of them did not agree with
the former, and two were unsure and had neutral opinion about ac-
culturation in social media. Most of the female respondents showed
more flexibility towards adapting to new cultures and traditions com-
pared to their male counterparts.


All three ethnic groups demonstrated more inclination towards in-
tegration than assimilation, separation or marginalisation, and cited
freedom and flexibility provided by the information availability on
social media as the primary reason for it. They further viewed ac-
culturation through social media is less stressful and less embarrassing
to try out new food habits or cooking or consumption behaviour be-
cause it gives them privacy and more time to get acculturated. Eighteen
respondents who said they were comfortable using advanced technol-
ogies and gadgets were found to be more inclined towards experi-
menting with cultures and customs from foreign countries. Elevated
interest of learning among Indian respondents about western cultures,
cuisines, clothing and arts were found synonymous within the age
group of 21–30, who spent considerable time on social media platforms.
Whereas White British and British Indians viewed occasional foreign
travel, multi-cultural social contacts, and spending some time in the
host country had synergistic effect on enhancing their openness towards
adapting to different cultures.


“10 years back I had no idea that I would be living in the United Kingdom
one day. I remember getting fascinated by some of the beautiful pictures
of this country my friends living here used to share on Orkut. My interest
to know more about this country grew when I first interacted with a
common British friend on social media, and then it further strengthened
after my first client visit here. After living here for some time, I can now
happily identify with both India and the UK”.


(Respondent BI5)


Four White British respondents reasoned about the influence of viral
posts, religious pages and groups, and cultural campaigns on social
media in generating interest among the social media users to learn more
about other religions, traditions and cultures. One of them even at-
tributed one of his friends' assimilation to a new religion and culture to
the Facebook page and posts of a religious charity organisation.


“I know of a friend who really got liking to a religious page on Facebook.
He once told me he was touched by the traditions, beliefs and preaching
of this organisation. After remaining as a follower for some years it was
no surprise for us to see him converting into the new religion. After
changing his name, he now happily wears ethnic costumes and have
tuned into a complete vegan”.


(Respondent BR8)


From our analysis it shows that all respondents could relate to the
six types of social media including social networking sites: content
communications, collaborative projects, blogs, virtual social worlds,
and virtual game worlds, as stated by Kaplan and Haenlein (2010).
However, most of the respondents were either unaware of the virtual
game worlds' prominence or were unsure about how if it at all influ-
enced their perspective about other cultures of customs. Overall, it
emerged clearly from their responses that different social media plat-
forms necessitate different levels of social connectivity while influen-
cing the process of acculturation differently.


4.3. Influence of social media acculturation on food consumption


Respondents from different ethnic groups showed many similarities
as well as differences in perception or opinion regarding the influence
of social media on their acculturation to food and sustainable con-
sumption. The Indians preferred social media to social interaction and
cited that abundance of information on social media gives them


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


486






freedom and time to like and consume the food of their choice. Whereas
British Indians and White British respondents preferred social interac-
tion marginally to social media usage to get influenced by food from
other cultures – however, agreeing that social media is changing the
way they perceived it earlier.


While all three groups interviewed agreed that the shared content
on social media has increased their confidence in trying out new recipes
without being exposed to awkwardness and discomfort, their opinion
about inculcating consumption behaviour solely through social media
differed. British Indians demonstrated more openness to adapt to
Western foods and food habits compared to the Indians. However, for
Indian respondents the content on sites such as Facebook, Twitter and
YouTube influenced their adaptability to Western food habits more
than their counterparts in British Indians and White British re-
spondents. Whereas, British Indians cited integration of social media
information and direct social interaction to be more empowering for
acculturation to different food habits and consumption behaviour.


“I really wanted to try lasagne after seeing my friend's Facebook post. It
looked yummy. Unfortunately, I could not have it outside because in our
culture we don't eat beef. So, I browsed recipes on YouTube and custo-
mised my own recipe by replacing beef with paneer and chicken, which
came out really delicious. I became popular among my friends for my
fusion recipe of lasagne and many of my friends now follow it”.


(Respondent BI2)


“When I arrived in this country, I knew only how to cook in Indian style.
But friends and roommates taught me various ways of western cooking
that looked easy and healthy to me. And now I can have all the in-
formation I need from social media about Indian as well as western style
of cooking, which means I have best of both without compromising either
on taste or on health”.


(Respondent BI16)


Age group emerged as an important factor for food acculturation
with younger generations showing more flexibility towards integration
than the older ones. At the same time, when asked, older generation of
respondents residing in the UK exhibited more leaning towards in-
tegration compared to their counterparts in India. However, re-
spondents who are older than 60 years mainly exhibited the signs of
‘separation’ (Berry, 2008).


“I like to have Indian food sometimes and tried once to learn it on
YouTube. But let me tell you it's a real pain, requires a lot of patience.
Not feasible at all when you come back from work all tired and not in a
mood to spend some good time in the kitchen. I would rather prefer
baking over cooking a curry”.


(Respondent BR7)


White British respondents agreed that social media information
related to issues such as food recycling, hunger and poverty etc. influ-
enced the way they looked at the food consumption. The Indian re-
spondents were primarily driven by information related to healthy
cooking, nutrient preservation, food storage and easy cooking for
adapting to western cooking and food habits.


In terms of preferences for social media platforms White British
respondents were more influenced by food blogs and dedicated web-
sites, whereas Indians cited Facebook as main source of influence, and
British Indians preferred YouTube to other platforms for the informa-
tion shared. While no concluding evidence were found why different
groups preferred a specific social media platform, our analyses points
towards certain parameters that could be establishing correlation
among the usage patterns. According to the Global Digital Report by
ComScore (2018), Indians users of Facebook spend on an average ap-
proximately 13% more time on Facebook than their White British
counterparts. While Indian social media users demonstrated clear pre-
ference to browsing food related content on smart devices, their White
British counterparts had no clear preference for the same. It is worth


mentioning that Indian respondents had an average of 560 contacts on
their Facebook account whereas White British respondents had ap-
proximately 325 Facebook contacts. Furthermore, Indian respondents
had more numbers of intercultural contacts or friends and spent almost
double the amount of time on Facebook compared to White British
respondents. It could easily point at our previous assessment that in-
tercultural interactions outside the purview of migration open avenues
for remote acculturation (Jensen et al., 2011). This further supports our
identification of having multicultural social contacts a driver (Table 2)
for remote acculturation. The White British respondents showed clear
preference for browsing specific information over the content shared by
their network or friends – which in turn points towards the salient
features of food blogs and dedicated websites. British Indians' pre-
ference for YouTube over Facebook can be linked to the outcome of the
UK Social Media Demographic Study 2016 (Weareflint, 2016), which
reveals YouTube (at 85%) as the favourite social media platform for
adults browsing web within the United Kingdom compared to Facebook
(78%). However, many commonalities were found between all three
groups agreeing to social media as a powerful information source that
influenced their acculturation to new food habits that included pre-
paration, consumption and preservation.


“When I look for information related to new recipes or food I tend to be
very selective. I prefer specialised websites and blogs over Facebook just
to avoid information overload”.


(Respondent BR6)


“I have learnt to cook authentic Indian chicken curry from a food blog.
The best part of this learning is that, no stress involved and I can make it
as hot as I like to have and, which might not be possible while trying out
at restaurant. Now I have many versions of my own curry, which my
British friends rejoice”.


(Respondent BR6)


It emerged clearly from the analysis that social media has a strong
influence on the respondents' acculturation to new food, while offering
them with discretion to choose both convenience and traditional food
(Laroche et al., 1998). From the analysis of data it also appeared that
respondents felt social media to be a ‘facilitator’ and not ‘imposer’ as far
as their acculturation to food was concerned. The analysis also heaved
conflicting viewpoint from same age group of respondents residing in
different countries. Respondents over 60 who are residents of UK cited
‘taste’ as the primary influencer of trying new food whereas their
counterparts in India reasoned with ‘health benefits’ to try continental
food. However, in the both cases respondents exhibited ‘separation’
after the initial experience of adapting to different food – although for
different reasons.


“After watching the health benefits of continental cuisines on social
media, we tried it once while staying in a hotel and it was completely
tasteless…no flavour…no colour at all. After having Indian food for so


Table 2
Drivers and barriers to food acculturation on social media.


Drivers Barriers


• Weak ethnic ties
• Soft religious inclination
• Unrestricted cultural consumption
• Social media expert
• More time spent online
• Multicultural social contacts
• Multi-lingual content
• Technology savvy
• Good first experience
• Low age group
• Loves cooking own food
• Adventurous while eating out
• Frequent overseas travel


• Strong ethnic ties
• Strong religious inclination
• Cultural food segregation
• Low social media skills
• Less time spent online
• No multicultural social networks
• Weak communication skills
• Technology skills
• Bad first experience
• High age group
• Low interest in cooking
• Sense of insecurity while eating out
• Ingredients unavailability


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


487






many years it is difficult for us to eat this kind of food.”
(Respondent IN8)


Participants acknowledged that social media augmented their fa-
miliarity with other cultures and food – which has helped them in
adapting to new food habits during their overseas travel, and that
somehow confirms that the acculturation actually starts well before the
immigration with consumption of host culture products (Penaloza,
1994b). However, while travelling they confessed to have searched for
the ancestral food as their first point of eating to start with. The analysis
also revealed that the first experience of having food of different culture
further shapes respondents' flexibility and pace towards food ac-
culturation. Which means a bad experience during the first attempt at a
new food decreases the flexibility and pace of their acculturation
whereas a good experience does exactly the opposite. YouTube emerged
as the most sought after social media platform for searching recipes of
food from other cultures. At the same time 10 respondents acknowl-
edged that multimedia content on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram
urged them to learn more about new cooking methods and cuisines.
Participants revealed that language acted as both driver and barrier in
the acculturation process (see Table 2). While language acts as a barrier
or stress during the traditional acculturation with immigrants (Smith
and Khawaja, 2011), it is a driver of acculturation on social media by
offering content in both host and ethnic languages.


4.4. Information diffusion on social media and sustainable behavioural
change


All respondents understood the necessity and importance of social
networks on the spreading of information through multiple sharing and
interactions. From four general types of information diffusion: herd
behaviour, information cascades, diffusion of innovation, and epi-
demics (Zafarani et al., 2014), analysis revealed that the types of con-
tent respondents accessed and shared can mainly be attributed to herd
behaviour, information cascades and diffusion of innovation. Twenty
out of twenty four respondents interviewed said they liked, trusted and
approved of the information related to food shared by their friends on
social networks (information cascades). Previous studies have also de-
monstrated the effectiveness of using social influence to promote sus-
tainable behaviour (see references in Goldsmith and Goldsmith, 2011).
They agreed that abundance of information on social media have in-
fluenced their food habits, cooking styles, and outlook towards food in
some way or other.


“I always loved Indian cuisines. But often I used to try ready-to-eat and
heat-and-eat meals, which were spicy and came with added pre-
servatives. Once, while browsing new recipes on Facebook, I came across
a live cooking class where I learned to cook from scratch. Now I feel
cooking from scratch is not a big deal. I fell it also has more nutritional
value and tastes good too”.


(Respondent BR2)


While most of the respondents agreed that information or content
shared by their contacts influenced their perceptions, any viral content
(diffusion of innovation) they came across sought more attention
compared to friends' posts. It has emerged from the analysis that user
generated content such as photos, videos, reviews, information, and
tags that are created by end-users influenced respondents' speed of
acculturation to sustainable behaviour. According to the respondents,
information related to best before date awareness, cooking from
scratch, nutritional benefits, healthy lifestyle or wellness, deep-
freezing, and advanced storage techniques help them in developing
sustainable consumption behaviour. While respondents residing in
India looked for information mainly related to storage and freezing,
their counterparts in the UK were more influenced by information
pertaining to fresh cooking, best before date awareness.


“I have seen a lot of videos on social media related to advanced way of
storing food for a longer time. On YouTube and Facebook, I have seen
many videos from western countries depicting new ways of freezing,
preservation, and storage. Here in India our food generally gets spoiled
quickly due to climatic conditions and watching those videos helped me a
lot”.


(Respondent IN6)


Most of the respondents interviewed said they either regularly
browsed or invariably came across content related to food waste and
sustainable consumption in the form of videos, photographs, blogs, live
videos, stories, and cooking classes. However, more than 90% of the
respondents agreed that content shared by their role models such as
celebrities, sportspersons, religious leaders, celebrity chefs and global
organisations influenced the most. While almost all respondents ac-
knowledged the influence of role models on their behaviour, the age
group of 20–35 exhibited strong affiliation to such viral contents.
Almost 60% respondents agreed that information or content that go
viral mostly carry meaningful information for the community.
Moreover, our analysis reveals that social media not only helps in in-
formation diffusion but also offers synergistic effects for its users when
combined with real-life interactions with people from other cultures
and belief systems.


“I never understood the concept of recycling leftover food that I used to
bin. But after seeing some of the posts by my Indian friends that linked
wasting of food to some kind of evil or sin, I have tried to recycle and
store my leftover food. It does make a lot of sense to me now and even
more after watching videos showing hunger and malnutrition in many
countries around the world”.


(Respondent BR1)


It emerged clearly from our analysis that respondents residing in
India were more influenced by information pertaining to storage and
preservation techniques whereas Indians residing in the UK were more
influenced by nutrition, wellness and health benefits to carve out
change in their consumption behaviour. Almost all respondents rea-
soned that social media is the primary source of information that aids


Table 3
Illustrations of acculturation in social media.


Respondents Residence Illustrative quote Acculturation themes


IN4 India “The best part of learning about and trying out new cultures on social media is that we have the full
freedom to choose what we want…”


Acculturation in social media


BI2 U.K. “I browsed recipes on YouTube and customised my own recipe by replacing beef with paneer and
chicken, which came out really delicious.”


Food acculturation in social media


BR6 U.K. “I have learnt to cook authentic Indian chicken curry from YouTube. The best part of this learning is
that, no stress involved and I can make it as hot as I like to have.”


Food acculturation in social media


BR1 U.K. “I never understood the concept of recycling leftover food that I used to bin…I have tried to recycle
and store my leftover food…. after watching videos showing hunger and malnutrition in many
countries around the world.”


Information diffusion and acculturation to
sustainable behaviour


BR5 U.K. “I never had this notion of eating food items after the ‘best before date’. …Now I don't mind eating as
long as it looks good to eat.”


Information diffusion and acculturation to
sustainable behaviour


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


488






increased awareness related to environmental pollution, sustainability,
and food waste, which guides them gradually towards developing sus-
tainable consumption behaviour (see Table 3). One respondent also
cited, ‘Love Food Hate Waste’ campaign that focussed primarily on
raising awareness about the consequences of food waste by rendering
consumers the information and knowledge required in order to change
their behaviour, as an example that has largely impacted her behaviour.


“Earlier, I never had this notion of eating food items after the “best before
date”. But I was surprised to see one of my Indian housemates eating
fruits and veges even after the best before date. When I searched about
more information on Google, it took me to the Facebook page of my
university where I could learn that we can consume the food as long as it
is not spoiled. Now I don't mind eating as long as it looks good to eat”.


(Respondent BR5)


5. Discussion


The current research investigated the aspects of remote accultura-
tion in the context of its correlation with social media. With vast ex-
pansion of the Internet, social media aids the extension of an in-
dividual's social network to a scale that was previously unimaginable
(Kane et al., 2014). This extension enables social media users to widen
their social networks using social media and get connected to new in-
formation and ideas that were previously inaccessible (Leonardi, 2014;
Richey and Ravishankar, 2017; Treem and Leonardi, 2012). Further-
more, the emergence of social media has presented an opportunity for
the indirect and/or discontinuous interaction between cultures in the
“globalised, de-territorialized world” to enable remote acculturation,
despite the interacting cultural groups being geographically separated
(Appadurai, 1991, p. 196; Ferguson and Bornstein, 2012). Although,
this research primarily focussed on one parameter of acculturation that
is food, it bolstered the validity of remote acculturation through its
findings. Locher et al. (2005) also stated that any research on ac-
culturation would be incomplete without involving the element of food
consumption, owing to the significance of food to an individual's well-
being.


The study extended our understanding of remote acculturation
supported by the findings of Ferguson and Bornstein (2015) that states
intermittent and indirect intercultural contact can shape a new form of
acculturation or remote acculturation. While the findings of this study
evidenced social media can help in creating a virtual social setting to
aid remote acculturation, it also aligned with arguments (Dey et al.,
2018) that social media is narrowing the gap between our virtual and
real life in many different ways. This study added a new dimension to
existing acculturation research by adding how social media aids food
acculturation and influences in building or modifying sustainable con-
sumption behaviour through information diffusion. This study re-
presents a first step to extend the scope of integrating social media with
remote acculturation, food acculturation and consumption behaviour –
which can be scaled-up to exert a high impact in terms of addressing
global food security issues. Through this study the potential vehicles of
remote acculturation could be found in the production and consump-
tion of content on social media platforms. Moreover, it is imperative to
have a replication or extension study that can not only validate the
findings of a previous research but also help to avoid replication crisis
by assessing the robustness of such findings, and thereby extending
those results theoretically (Bonett, 2012; Duncan et al., 2014).


5.1. Theoretical implications


The core focus and motivation behind studying these aspects of
acculturation is deeply rooted in understanding how acculturation oc-
curs on social media and how influential it is in the absence of direct
contacts between intercultural groups. By doing so this study advances
the current knowledge in remote acculturation as well as in food


acculturation. With growing online users, the expansion of social con-
tacts does not fall hostage to the boundaries of country, culture, food
habits, ideologies or customs. In addition, the availability of informa-
tion, new ideas, innovations and ideologies are not restricted to social
contacts. Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
Instagram, Pinterest, WeChat among others act as harbingers of in-
formation dissemination with strong inter-personal influence. As con-
sumers associate with social media users with diverse background they
get opportunity to engage others with different mind-sets, experiences,
viewpoints and expertise (Kane et al., 2014). These new interfaces of
information diffusion, on integrating various sources of information,
believed to enhance the opportunities for the unearthing, learning and
expansion of new ideas (Dahlander and Piezunka, 2014; Mount and
Martinez, 2014). This process unvaryingly influences exchange of new
ideas, best practices, cultural eloquences and behavioural traits. It
further contributes towards building literature by linking social media
acculturation to the information diffusion theory and sustainable con-
sumption behaviour. Notwithstanding the limited scope of this study to
select three cultural group for research, this can easily be generalised to
cover other intercultural groups, geographical setting and other car-
dinal issues. We argue that production and consumption of social media
content along with exposure to social media platforms are directly
proportional to the amount of openness for food acculturation. Ad-
ditionally, the abundance of information on social media has sub-
stantial influence on how people see, perceive and eat food. These are
the new dimensions that are added to existing literature on accultura-
tion, food acculturation and behavioural studies.


6. Conclusions and future research


To the best of our knowledge this is the first attempt to examine the
role of social media in acculturation of sustainable consumption be-
haviour. This study places emphasis on the role of social media as a key
acculturation agent, which influences acculturation in a positive way. It
is evident from the findings that by offering a platform for information
diffusion, social media immensely facilitates sustainable behavioural
change among online users. The results demonstrate the absence of
adaptation stress to be a powerful differentiator for acculturation in
social media compared to the traditional acculturation. The study also
finds that acculturation in social media follows the ‘internal pull’ pro-
cess where users use their own prerogatives to choose adaptation to a
new culture without the pressure imposed by the dominant group or
society in contrast to ‘external push’ experienced during traditional
acculturation. The findings revealed that respondents primarily ex-
humed ‘integration’ during the remote acculturation in social media.
British Indians showed more integration than the other two ethnic
groups in terms of food habits and consumption behaviour.


Our research findings suggest that social media acts like an agent of
‘enabler’ and not an ‘imposer’ within the process of acculturation. Our
findings also demonstrate that social media diminishes the stress of
language barrier during acculturation and influences users towards
‘integration’ instead of ‘separation’. While we anticipate that further
advancement in technologies would make social media a harbinger of
remote acculturation through information cascades and diffusion of
innovations, further research is necessary to validate this argument.
Regarding sustainable consumption, our findings establish clear linkage
of social media to remote acculturation of sustainable food consump-
tion behaviour. However, more research is required to substantiate how
interventions in information diffusion can form a basis for encouraging
the acculturation of sustainable behaviour among the food consumers.
Such research will help in expanding the theories of remote ac-
culturation and further help in understanding the key drivers of beha-
vioural change through technology and social media platform.


Although, the scope of analysis in this study is limited to experience
and perception of respondents, we would argue that it is a vital step
towards initiating an integrated research combining important issues


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


489






such as acculturation and sustainable consumption behaviour, and
linking it to information diffusion on social media. Future research
could focus on studying more on how information diffusion could be
modelled to control and predict the spread of information to influence
remote acculturation in social media – with a focus on sustainable
consumption of food so as to meet the goals of food security. Finally,
this research could be useful for social media and sustainability stra-
tegists attempting to inculcate behavioural changes among the food
consumers.


Appendix 1


Interview questions – acculturation to sustainable consumption behaviour in
the social media.


1. Demographics – gender, age, nationality, education and residency


Theme 1: Social Media impact/influence on acculturation


2. How long have you been using social media and how much time
you spend being on social media?


3. What do you use social media primarily for and what are your
preferred social media platforms?


4. What type of content you view on social media and how do you
come across such content?


5. Do you have any contacts/friends from other countries or cul-
tures?


6. How do you learn about their (or other) culture, food and cus-
toms? Does social media has any role in this?


7. What drives/discourage you to learn more about different cul-
tures, food and customs?


8. Do you often go dining at international restaurants/cuisines?
9. Do you think abundance information on social media helps you


get closer to other cultures, food habits and customs? (If no, then why;
If yes, then how)?


10. Have you considered adapting to food habits, clothing or lan-
guages, which are other of yours? (If no, then why; If yes, then how)?
How do social media influence your cultural practices and does it en-
hance your flexibility to embrace elements of other cultures?


Theme 2: Social Media impact/influence on food acculturation


11. How do you learn the way you purchase, cook, preserve and
consume food items and how do social media play a role in it?


12. What information about food on social media interests you?
(Depending upon the answer, follow up questions from Q13–18


13. What role social media play in making your food choices?
14. How often do you cook food at home?
15. Do you love cooking new cuisines?
16. Where do you get new recipes and food ideas?
17. Does social media help you to learn about cuisines from other


countries and cultures?


Theme 3: Information diffusion and acculturation to sustainable food
consumption


18. Has the way you eat changed since you started browsing social
media to fetch more information about different types of food habits
and cuisines?


19. What type of information on social media do you think has most
influenced the change in the way you consume food?


20. What is your opinion about food waste?
21. Does social media render any information on how to stop food


waste? (If yes, how?)
22. What is your idea about sustainable food consumption and does


any content you view on social media shared by your international


friends or practices in different countries influence your perceptions? If
yes, how?


23. Have any of those shared information ever changed your out-
look towards food waste and your own practices of food consumption or
usage?


References


Appadurai, A., 1991. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective.
Cambridge University Press.


Appiah, O., 2001. Ethnic identification on adolescents' evaluations of advertisements. J.
Advert. Res. 7–22 (September/October).


Askegaard, S., Arnould, E.J., Kjeldgaard, D., 2005. Postassimilationist ethnic consumer
research: qualifications and extensions. J. Consum. Res. 2005, 160–170.


Berry, J.W., 1980. Acculturation as varieties of adaptation. In: Padilla, A.M. (Ed.),
Acculturation: Theory, Models and Some New Findings. Westview Press, Boulder,
CO., pp. 9–46.


Berry, J.W., 1997. Immigration, acculturation, and adaptation. Appl. Psychol. Int. Rev. 46
(1), 5–68.


Berry, J.W., 2005. Acculturation: living successfully in two cultures. Int. J. Intercult.
Relat. 29 (6), 697–712.


Berry, J.W., 2008. Globalisation and acculturation. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 32, 328–336.
Berry, J.W., Sam, D.L., 1997. Acculturation and adaptation. In: Handbook of Cross-cul-


tural Psychology. 3(1). pp. 291–326.
Berry, J., Kim, U., Minde, T., Mok, D., 1987. Comparative studies of acculturative stress.


Int. Migr. Rev. 21 (3), 491–511.
Besevegis, E., Pavlopoulos, V., 2008. Acculturation Patterns and Adaptation of


Immigrants in Greece. pp. 23–34.
Bjork, J., Magnusson, M., 2009. Where do good innovation ideas come from? Exploring


the influence of network connectivity on innovation idea quality. J. Prod. Innov.
Manag. 26 (6), 662–670.


Bonett, D.G., 2012. Replication-extension studies. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 21, 409–412.
Brewer, D.D., 2000. Forgetting in the recall-based elicitation of personal and social net-


works. Soc. Networks 22, 29–43.
Caligiuri, P., Lazarova, M., 2002. A model for the influence of social interaction and social


support on female expatriates' cross-cultural adjustment. Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag.
13 (5), 761.


Cappellini, B., Yen, D.A., 2013. Little emperors in the UK: acculturation and food over
time. J. Bus. Res. 66, 968–974.


Cassell, C., Symon, G., Buehring, A., Johnson, P., 2006. The role and status of qualitative
methods in management research: an empirical account. Manag. Decis. 44 (2),
290–303.


Cervellon, M.C., Dube ́, L., 2005. Cultural influences in the origins of food likings and
dislikes. Food Qual. Prefer. 16, 455–460.


Chen, R.T., Bennett, S., Maton, K., 2008. The adaptation of Chinese international students
to online flexible learning: two case studies. Distance Educ. 29, 307–323.


Chung, E., 2000. Navigating the primordial soup: charting the lived worlds of the migrant
consumer. J. Consum. Mark. 17, 36–54.


Chung, E., Fischer, E., 1999. It's who you know: intracultural differences in ethnic product
consumption. J. Consum. Mark. 16, 482–501.


Cleveland, M., Chang, W., 2009. Migration and materialism: the roles of ethnic identity,
religiosity, and generation. J. Bus. Res. 62, 963–971.


Cleveland, M., Laroche, M., 2007. Acculturation to the global consumer culture: scale
development and research paradigm. J. Bus. Res. 60 (3), 249–259.


Cleveland, M., Laroche, M., Pons, F., Kastoun, R., 2009. Acculturation and consumption:
textures of cultural adaptation. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 33, 196–212.


Cohen, L., Manion, L., 1994. Research Methods in Education, 4th ed. Longman, London.
ComScore, 2018. Global Digital Report 2018. Reprieved on 05/08/2018 from. https://


digitalreport.wearesocial.com/.
Cresswell, J.W., 2003. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods


Approaches, 2nd ed. Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Croucher, S.M., 2008. Looking beyond the Hijab. Hampton Press, Cresskill, NJ.
Croucher, S.M., 2011. Social networking and cultural adaptation: a theoretical model. J.


Int. Intercult. Commun. 4 (4), 259–264.
Dahlander, L., Piezunka, H., 2014. Open to suggestions: how organizations elicit sug-


gestions through proactive and reactive attention. Res. Policy 43, 812–827.
Dey, B.L., Balmer, J.M.T., Pandit, A., Saren, M., 2018. Selfie appropriation by young


British South Asian adults: reifying, endorsing and reinforcing dual cultural identity
in social media. Inf. Technol. People 31 (2), 482–506.


Duncan, G.J., Engel, M., Claessens, A., Dowsett, C.J., 2014. Replication and robustness in
developmental research. Dev. Psychol. 50 (11), 2417–2425.


Eriksson, P., Kovalainen, A., 2008. Introducing Qualitative Methods: Qualitative Methods
in Business Research. SAGE Publications Ltd, London.


Evans, D., 2011. Thrifty, green or frugal: reflections on sustainable consumption in a
changing economic climate. Geoforum 42 (5), 550–557.


Evans, D., Welch, D., Swaffield, J., 2017. Constructing and mobilizing ‘the consumer’:
responsibility, consumption and the politics of sustainability. Environ. Plan. A Econ.
Space 49 (6), 396–1412.


Ferguson, G.M., Bornstein, M.H., 2012. Remote acculturation: the “Americanization” of
Jamaican islanders. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 36, 167–177.


Ferguson, G.M., Bornstein, M.H., 2015. Remote acculturation of early adolescents in
Jamaica towards European American culture: a replication and extension. Int. J. Cult.
Relat. 45, 24–35.


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


490



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0120

https://digitalreport.wearesocial.com/

https://digitalreport.wearesocial.com/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0190




Fieldhouse, P., 1995. Biocultural perspectives on nutrition. In: Fieldhouse, P. (Ed.), Food
and Nutrition: Customs and Culture, 2nd ed. Chapman and Hall, London, United
Kingdom, pp. 1–29.


Forbush, E., Foucault-Welles, B., 2016. Social media use and adaptation among Chinese
students beginning to study in the United States. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 50, 1–12.


Fosset, M., 2006. Ethnic preferences, social distance dynamics, and residential segrega-
tion: theoretical explorations using simulation analysis. J. Math. Sociol. 30 (3),
185–273.


Geetika, S., Walia, R., Bhatia, M.P.S., 2014. Analysis of information diffusion in dynamic
information networks. In: International Conference on Contemporary Computing and
Informatics (IC3I), pp. 1107–1111.


Goldsmith, E.B., Goldsmith, R.E., 2011. Social influence and sustainability in households.
Int. J. Consum. Stud. 35, 117–121.


Granovetter, M., 1983. The strength of weak ties: a network theory revisited. Sociol
Theory 1 (1), 201–233.


Guille, A., Hakim Hacid, H., Favre, C., Zighed, D.A., 2013. Information diffusion in online
social networks: a survey. SIGMOD Rec. 42 (2), 17–28.


Hartwell, H.J., Edwards, J.S.A., Brown, L., 2011. Acculturation and food habits: lessons to
be learned. Br. Food J. 113 (11), 1393–1405.


Henry, D., Stattner, E., Collard, M., 2017. Social media, diffusion under influence of
parameters: survey and perspectives. Procedia Comput. Sci. 109, 376–383.


Holloway, I., Wheeler, S., 2010. Qualitative Research in Nursing and Healthcare.
Blackwell, Oxford.


Hughner, R., McDonagh, P., Prothero, A., Shultz, C.J., Stanton, J., 2007. Who are organic
food consumers? A compilation and review of why people purchase organic food. J.
Consum. Behav. 6 (2–3), 94–110.


Ishak, N., Salehuddin, M., Zahari, M., Othman, Z., 2013. Influence of acculturation on
foodways among ethnic groups and common acceptable food. Procedia. Soc. Behav.
Sci. 105, 438–444.


Jackson, T., 2005. Live better by consuming less? Is there a “double dividend” in sus-
tainable consumption? J. Ind. Ecol. 9, 19–36.


Jensen, L.A., Arnett, J.J., McKenzie, J., 2011. Globalization and cultural identity. In:
Schwartz, S.J., Luyckx, K., Vignoles, V.L. (Eds.), Handbook of identity theory and
research. Structures and Processes Vol. 1. Springer Science+Business Media, New
York, pp. 285–301.


Kane, G.C., Alavi, M., Labianca, G., Borgatti, S.P., 2014. What's different about social
networks? A framework and research agenda. MIS Q. 38 (1), 274–304.


Kaplan, A.M., Haenlein, M., 2010. Users of the world, unite! The challenges and oppor-
tunities of social media. Bus. Horiz. 53 (1), 59–68.


King, N., 2004. Using templates in the thematic analysis of text. In: Cassell, C., Symon, G.
(Eds.), Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research. SAGE
Publications Ltd, London, pp. 256–270.


Kizgin, H., Jamal, A., Dey, B.L., Rana, N.P., 2018. The impact of social media on con-
sumers' acculturation and purchase intentions. Inf. Syst. Front. 20 (3), 503–514.


Kramer, E.M., 2003. The Emerging Monoculture: Assimilation and the “Model Minority”.
Praeger, Westport, CT.


Kuo, B.C.H., Roysircar, G., 2004. Predictors of acculturation for Chinese adolescents in
Canada: age of arrival, length of stay, social class, and English reading ability. J.
Multicult. Couns. Dev. 32 (3), 143–154.


Laroche, M., Kim, C., Tomiuk, M.A., 1998. Italian ethnic identity and its relative impact
on the consumption of convenience and traditional foods. J. Consum. Mark. 15 (2),
125–151.


Laroche, M., Kim, C., Tomiuk, M.A., Belisle, D., 2005. Similarities in Italian and Greek
multidimensional ethnic identity: some implications for food consumption. Can. J.
Adm. Sci. 22 (2), 143–167.


Lee, W.N., Tse, D.K., 1994. Changing media consumption in a new home: acculturation
patterns among Hong Kong immigrants to Canada. J. Advert. 23, 57–70.


Leonardi, P.M., 2014. Social media, knowledge sharing, and innovation: toward a theory
of communication visibility. Inf. Syst. Res. 25 (4), 796–816.


Li, C., Tsai, W.S., 2015. Social media usage and acculturation: a test with Hispanics in the
U.S. Comput. Hum. Behav. 45, 204–212.


Liebkind, K., 2001. Acculturation. In: Brown, R., Gaertner, S. (Eds.), Blackwell Handbook
of Social Psychology: Intergroup Processes. Blackwell, Oxford, U. K., pp. 386–406.


Locher, J., Yoels, W., Maurer, D., vanElls, J., 2005. Comfort foods: an exploratory journey
into the social and emotional significance of food. Food Foodways 13 (4), 273–297.


Lucia, R., Ulrike, E., Sylvia, L., 2017. Sustainable food consumption: an overview of
contemporary issues and policies. Sustain. Sci. Pract. Policy 9 (2), 7–25.


Luedicke, M.K., 2011. Consumer acculturation theory: (crossing) conceptual boundaries.
Consum. Mark. Cult. 14 (3), 223–244.


Maldonado, R., Patriya, T., 1999. Transition challenges in consumer acculturation: role
destabilization and changes in symbolic consumption. Adv. Consum. Res. 26,
134–140.


Marsh, A., Sahin-Dikmen, M., 2002. Discrimination in Europe (Report B). Policy Studies
Institute, London.


Mason, J., 2002. Qualitative Researching. Sage, London.
Mendoza, R.H., 1989. An empirical scale to measure type and degree of acculturation in


Mexican-American adolescents and adults. J. Cross-Cult. Psychol. 20 (1), 372–385.
Mendoza, R.H., Martinez Jr., J.L., 1981. The measurement of acculturation. In: Baron


Jr.A. (Ed.), Explorations in Chicano Psychology. Praeger, New York, NY, pp. 71–82.
Miglietta, A., Tartaglia, S., 2008. The influence of length of stay, linguistic competence,


and media exposure in immigrants' adaptation. Cross-Cult. Res. 43 (1), 46–61.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, M.A., Saldana, J., 2014. Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods


Sourcebook. SAGE, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 381.
Miller, D., 2016. Social Media in an English Village. UCL Press.
Mount, M., Martinez, M.G., 2014. Social media: a tool for open innovation. Calif. Manag.


Rev. 56 (4), 124–143.


Oswald, L.R., 1999. Culture swapping: consumption and the ethnogenesis of middle-class
Haitian immigrants. J. Consum. Res. 25 (4), 303–318.


Park, R.E., Burgess, E.W., 1921. Introduction to the science of society. Am. J. Sociol. 27
(3), 393–394.


Patton, M.Q., 2002. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods, 3rd ed. Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.


Penaloza, L., 1994a. Atravesando Fronteras/border crossings: a critical ethnographic
exploration of the consumer acculturation of Mexican immigrants. J. Consum. Res.
289–294.


Penaloza, L., 1994b. Border crossings: a critical ethnographic exploration of the consumer
acculturation of Mexican immigrants. J. Consum. Res. 21, 32–54.


Penaloza, L., 1995. Immigrant consumers: marketing and public policy consideration in
the global economy. J. Public Policy Mark. 14 (1), 83–94.


Persky, I., Birman, D., 2005. Ethnic identity in acculturation research: a study of multiple
identities of Jewish refugees from the former Soviet Union. J. Cross-Cult. Psychol. 36,
557–572.


Phillips, F., 2008. Change in socio-technical systems: researching the Multis, the Biggers,
and the More Connecteds. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 75 (5), 721–734.


Phinney, J.S., Horenczyk, G., Liebkind, K., Vedder, P., 2001. Ethnic identity, immigration,
and well-being: an interactional perspective. J. Soc. Issues 57 (3), 493–510.


Redfield, R., Linton, R., Herskovits, M.J., 1936. Memorandum for the study of ac-
culturation. Am. Anthropol. 38 (1), 149–152.


Richey, M., Ravishankar, M.N., 2017. The role of frames and cultural toolkits in estab-
lishing new connections for social media innovation. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.07.026. (in press).


Rossiter, J.R., Chan, A.M., 1998. Ethnicity in business and consumer behaviour. J. Bus.
Res. 42 (2), 127–134.


Rudmin, F.W., 2003. Critical history of acculturation psychology of assimilation, se-
paration, integration, and marginalization. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 7 (1), 3–37.


Salkind, N.J., 2006. Exploring Research, 6th edition. Prince-Hall, Upper Saddle River.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., Thornhill, A., 2009. Research Methods for Business Students, 5th


ed. Pearson Education, Harlow, United Kingdom.
Scott, D., Morrison, M., 2007. Key Ideas in Educational Research. Continuum, London.
Silverman, D., 2013. Doing qualitative research, 4th ed. SAGE Publications Ltd., London,


United Kingdom.
Simmons, F., 1991. Food in China — A Cultural and Historical Inquiry. CRC Press, United


States.
Simons, S.E., 1901. Social assimilation. Am. J. Sociol. 6, 790–822.
Smith, R.A., Khawaja, N.G., 2011. A review of the acculturation experiences of interna-


tional students. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 35 (6), 699–713.
Strauss, A., 1987. Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge University Press,


New York.
Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Suri, H., 2011. Purposeful sampling in qualitative research synthesis. Qual. Res. J. 11 (2),


63–75.
Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C., 1986. The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In:


Worchel, S., Austin, W.G. (Eds.), Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Nelson-Hall,
Chicago, pp. 7–24.


Treem, J.W., Leonardi, P.M., 2012. Social media use in organizations: exploring the af-
fordances of visibility, editability, persistence, and association. Commun. Yearb. 36
(2012), 143–189.


Tufekci, Z., 2008. Grooming, gossip, Facebook and Myspace: what can we learn about
these sites from those who won't assimilate? Inf. Commun. Soc. 11, 544–564.


Uhle, A.F., Grivetti, L.E., 1993. Alpine and Brazilian Swiss food patterns after a century of
isolation. Ecol. Food Nutr. 29 (22), 119–138.


Ustuner, T., Holt, D., 2007. Dominated consumer acculturation: the social construction of
poor migrant women's consumer identity projects in a Turkish squatter. J. Consum.
Res. 34, 41–56.


Verbeke, W., Lo ́pez, G.P., 2005. Ethnic food attitudes and behaviours among Belgians
and Hispanics living in Belgium. Br. Food J. 107 (11), 823–840.


Vieregge, M., Lin, J.J., Drakopoulos, R., Bruggmann, C., 2009. Immigrants' perception of
ethnic restaurants: the case of Asian immigrants' perception of Chinese restaurants in
Switzerland. Tour. Cult. Commun. 9, 49–64.


Ward, C., Kennedy, A., 1994. Acculturation strategies, psychological adjustment and
sociocultural competence during cross-cultural transitions. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 18,
329–343.


Weareflint, 2016. UK Social Media Demographic Study. Retrieved on 5/08/2018 from.
https://weareflint.co.uk/uk-social-media-demographics-2016-main-findings.


Yang, J., Counts, S., 2010. Predicting the speed, scale, and range of information diffusion
in twitter. In: ICWSM. 10. pp. 355–358.


Yanow, D., Schwartz-Shea, P., 2011. Interpretive Approaches to Research Design:
Concepts and Processes. Routledge, Netherlands.


Zafarani, R., Abbasi, M., Liu, H., 2014. Social Media Mining: An Introduction. Cambridge
University Press.


Sonal Choudhary, PhD, is a Lecturer in Sustainable Management at the Sheffield
University Management School, UK. Her main research interests are in the areas of sus-
tainability issues in food system, food loss and waste, circular economy, sustainable be-
havioural change and digital supply chain management. She has worked on numerous
projects funded by European Commission (FP7), Marie Curie (ITN), British Academy,
Newton Fund, Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), N8 Agri-food,
Science and Technology Facility Council (STFC) Food Network+ and has published in
leading international OM/SCM journals.


Rakesh Nayak is a full-time Lecturer at Hull University Business School. Prior to that he


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


491



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0430

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.07.026

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf2000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf2000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0530

https://weareflint.co.uk/uk-social-media-demographics-2016-main-findings

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(17)31722-5/rf0550




was a director at LeanSig Limited, a UK based management consultancy specialising in
marketing strategy and operational excellence consulting. He is a certified PMP, PRINCE2
Practitioner, ScrumMaster and an ITIL v3 professional developing multi-facet operational
and programme management strategies for improving marketing strategy, quality, pro-
ductivity, agility and cost efficiency. He has more than 14 years of professional experience
in marketing management, LSS, operations and strategy consulting in several Fortune 500
companies.


Sushma Kumari is a full-time Lecturer at University of Hull. Prior to that, she has worked
as HR Executive in different international firms in India. She has also worked as a re-
search assistant on numerous projects funded by Biotechnology and Biological Sciences


Research Council (BBSRC), British Academy (BA), Horizon 20–20, Innovate UK, Higher
Education Academy (HEA). Her research articles have been published in various re-
nowned journals of Operations Research and Operations & Supply chain Management.


Homagni Choudhury is as an Associate Professor in the School of Law, Social and
Behavioural Sciences. Homagni has a strong background in academia with professional
research and teaching experience in a wide range of topics in economics, business and
other allied areas in social sciences. His broad research interests lie in the areas of Applied
Economics and Development. He has published widely in the form of peer-reviewed ar-
ticles, book chapters, book, discussion papers, working papers, and conference papers and
proceedings.


S. Choudhary et al. Technological Forecasting & Social Change 145 (2019) 481–492


492




