









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.comAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com


ScienceDirect
Procedia CIRP 00 (2017) 000–000


  www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 


2212-8271 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


28th CIRP Design Conference, May 2018, Nantes, France


A new methodology to analyze the functional and physical architecture of 
existing products for an assembly oriented product family identification 


Paul Stief *, Jean-Yves Dantan, Alain Etienne, Ali Siadat 
École Nationale Supérieure d’Arts et Métiers, Arts et Métiers ParisTech, LCFC EA 4495, 4 Rue Augustin Fresnel, Metz 57078, France 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 3 87 37 54 30; E-mail address: paul.stief@ensam.eu


Abstract 


In today’s business environment, the trend towards more product variety and customization is unbroken. Due to this development, the need of 
agile and reconfigurable production systems emerged to cope with various products and product families. To design and optimize production
systems as well as to choose the optimal product matches, product analysis methods are needed. Indeed, most of the known methods aim to 
analyze a product or one product family on the physical level. Different product families, however, may differ largely in terms of the number and 
nature of components. This fact impedes an efficient comparison and choice of appropriate product family combinations for the production
system. A new methodology is proposed to analyze existing products in view of their functional and physical architecture. The aim is to cluster
these products in new assembly oriented product families for the optimization of existing assembly lines and the creation of future reconfigurable 
assembly systems. Based on Datum Flow Chain, the physical structure of the products is analyzed. Functional subassemblies are identified, and 
a functional analysis is performed. Moreover, a hybrid functional and physical architecture graph (HyFPAG) is the output which depicts the 
similarity between product families by providing design support to both, production system planners and product designers. An illustrative
example of a nail-clipper is used to explain the proposed methodology. An industrial case study on two product families of steering columns of 
thyssenkrupp Presta France is then carried out to give a first industrial evaluation of the proposed approach. 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


Keywords: Assembly; Design method; Family identification


1. Introduction 


Due to the fast development in the domain of 
communication and an ongoing trend of digitization and
digitalization, manufacturing enterprises are facing important
challenges in today’s market environments: a continuing
tendency towards reduction of product development times and
shortened product lifecycles. In addition, there is an increasing
demand of customization, being at the same time in a global 
competition with competitors all over the world. This trend, 
which is inducing the development from macro to micro 
markets, results in diminished lot sizes due to augmenting
product varieties (high-volume to low-volume production) [1]. 
To cope with this augmenting variety as well as to be able to
identify possible optimization potentials in the existing
production system, it is important to have a precise knowledge


of the product range and characteristics manufactured and/or 
assembled in this system. In this context, the main challenge in
modelling and analysis is now not only to cope with single 
products, a limited product range or existing product families,
but also to be able to analyze and to compare products to define
new product families. It can be observed that classical existing
product families are regrouped in function of clients or features.
However, assembly oriented product families are hardly to find. 


On the product family level, products differ mainly in two
main characteristics: (i) the number of components and (ii) the
type of components (e.g. mechanical, electrical, electronical). 


Classical methodologies considering mainly single products 
or solitary, already existing product families analyze the
product structure on a physical level (components level) which 
causes difficulties regarding an efficient definition and
comparison of different product families. Addressing this 


Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831


2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems.
10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.207


© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems.





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 











2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 


Distributed logistics platform based on Blockchain and IoT 
 Nejc Rožmana, Rok Vrabiča, Marko Corna, Tomaž Požrla, Janez Diacia  


aUniversity of Ljubljana, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ljubljana, Slovenia 
 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +386-1-477-1732. E-mail address: nejc.rozman@fs.uni-lj.si 


Abstract 


This paper presents an approach to integrating Blockchain and IoT technologies into modern supply chains. We propose the concept of a new 
logistics platform that is built as a distributed network of nodes and offers an alternative approach dealing with the complexity of modern supply 
chains by breaking them into smaller, functionally independent parts. The modular structure of the platform allows users to add their own nodes 
or extend the functionality of the existing ones. Nodes are communicating with the use of IoT technology, which serves as a bridge between the 
virtual and real worlds, making this platform truly digital. Blockchain technology is not only used for writing down agreements and for making 
transactions, but also as a trustworthy public listing of services and information. It connects the nodes into a public and secure system that provides 
reliable services of a supply chain. In this work, we describe the individual nodes and their implementation and present preliminary results of 
experiments using a laboratory model of a logistic chain.  
 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


 Keywords: Internet of Things; Blockchain; logistics; supply chain management; distributed network 


 
1. Introduction 


Digitalization of the logistics and supply chain has created 
many opportunities for companies, however, it also presents 
them with new challenges. With the arrival of e-commerce, 
parcel industry is on a constant rise with the numbers of Stock 
Keeping Units (SKU) historically at their highest, with 85 
million packages and documents delivered around the world 
every single day [1]. On the other side, customer demands are 
getting bigger and more divergent, creating new challenges for 
supply chain management. In order to control the whole supply 
chain, companies are investing a lot of their time and money in 
new technologies such as it is the Internet of Things (IoT). 
Smart devices implemented in every part of the chain are 
acquiring and working with enormous quantities of data. 
Regardless of all new technologies, ever-growing complexity 
of the supply chain still represents a major obstacle for supply 
chain companies. For example, placement of the RFID tags in 
parts of the supply chain alone does not fully realize its 


potential unless the company knows how to share the data and 
how to use it to solve the problems [2]. 


The growth of the larger companies, taking control over the 
supply chain as they increase their market share, has become a 
serious problem for SMEs. In order to become a part of the 
system, they have to compete with low prices and global reach 
of bigger companies. Distributed digital platforms are allowing 
small companies to have a global reach and to compete with 
the sector’s established giants, becoming increasingly 
important in the logistics industry. In the future, a dominant 
global platform is going to transform the customer’s experience 
of logistics and the companies which will be able to adapt and 
join the platform will be the winners in a truly digital logistics 
industry [1]. 


A further strategic issue that provides a challenge for 
logistics management is the continued trend towards 
globalization which adds its own piece to the complexity of 
supply chain management. A global company is more than a 
multinational company. In a global business, materials and 





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 











2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 


Distributed logistics platform based on Blockchain and IoT 
 Nejc Rožmana, Rok Vrabiča, Marko Corna, Tomaž Požrla, Janez Diacia  


aUniversity of Ljubljana, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ljubljana, Slovenia 
 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +386-1-477-1732. E-mail address: nejc.rozman@fs.uni-lj.si 


Abstract 


This paper presents an approach to integrating Blockchain and IoT technologies into modern supply chains. We propose the concept of a new 
logistics platform that is built as a distributed network of nodes and offers an alternative approach dealing with the complexity of modern supply 
chains by breaking them into smaller, functionally independent parts. The modular structure of the platform allows users to add their own nodes 
or extend the functionality of the existing ones. Nodes are communicating with the use of IoT technology, which serves as a bridge between the 
virtual and real worlds, making this platform truly digital. Blockchain technology is not only used for writing down agreements and for making 
transactions, but also as a trustworthy public listing of services and information. It connects the nodes into a public and secure system that provides 
reliable services of a supply chain. In this work, we describe the individual nodes and their implementation and present preliminary results of 
experiments using a laboratory model of a logistic chain.  
 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


 Keywords: Internet of Things; Blockchain; logistics; supply chain management; distributed network 


 
1. Introduction 


Digitalization of the logistics and supply chain has created 
many opportunities for companies, however, it also presents 
them with new challenges. With the arrival of e-commerce, 
parcel industry is on a constant rise with the numbers of Stock 
Keeping Units (SKU) historically at their highest, with 85 
million packages and documents delivered around the world 
every single day [1]. On the other side, customer demands are 
getting bigger and more divergent, creating new challenges for 
supply chain management. In order to control the whole supply 
chain, companies are investing a lot of their time and money in 
new technologies such as it is the Internet of Things (IoT). 
Smart devices implemented in every part of the chain are 
acquiring and working with enormous quantities of data. 
Regardless of all new technologies, ever-growing complexity 
of the supply chain still represents a major obstacle for supply 
chain companies. For example, placement of the RFID tags in 
parts of the supply chain alone does not fully realize its 


potential unless the company knows how to share the data and 
how to use it to solve the problems [2]. 


The growth of the larger companies, taking control over the 
supply chain as they increase their market share, has become a 
serious problem for SMEs. In order to become a part of the 
system, they have to compete with low prices and global reach 
of bigger companies. Distributed digital platforms are allowing 
small companies to have a global reach and to compete with 
the sector’s established giants, becoming increasingly 
important in the logistics industry. In the future, a dominant 
global platform is going to transform the customer’s experience 
of logistics and the companies which will be able to adapt and 
join the platform will be the winners in a truly digital logistics 
industry [1]. 


A further strategic issue that provides a challenge for 
logistics management is the continued trend towards 
globalization which adds its own piece to the complexity of 
supply chain management. A global company is more than a 
multinational company. In a global business, materials and 






 Nejc Rožman  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831 827
2 Nejc Rožman et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


components are sourced worldwide and products may be 
manufactured offshore and sold in many different countries, 
perhaps with local customization. Challenge for globalized 
supply chain companies is in the management of the complex 
web of relationships and flows that characterize their supply 
chains [3]. Globalization is providing a variety of opportunities 
for improving supply chain performance. However, the same 
advancements also increase global competition, increasing 
pressure on both established and emerging industries and firms 
to design and operate their supply chains as efficiently and cost-
effectively as possible [4]. A result of globalization is the 
involvement of various independent parties (freight forwarders, 
3rd party logistics service providers, multimodal transport 
operators, carriers, etc.). Accurate communication between 
these parties is the key to success and a platform is a common 
way where all parties share the necessary relevant information. 
The problem when adopting such approaches is that existing 
platforms are managed by the central authority. While having 
platform dominance often represents a good business 
opportunity for the company running the platform, other actors 
have to pay fees and follow the rules of the platform owner. 
Furthermore, having a single player to control the rules, poses 
a risk for diversity and fairness in the market. Multiple 
competing platform companies, on the other hand, create the 
risk of a splintered market resulting in non-optimal logistics 
decisions in separate silos [5]. 


The emerging technology of Blockchain has brought a lot of 
attention to the supply chain companies with its functionality, 
as they are putting a lot of their effort to integrate the 
technology into the supply chain [6]. Manufacturing part of the 
supply chain has already made some implementations of the 
new technologies, to open up and share manufacturing 
knowledge in order to increase production [7, 8, 9].  The main 
property of the technology being a cost-effective transmission 
of transactions in peer-to-peer networks with no central system 
and without the mediation of a third person, can simplify B2B 
integration and enables micro level IoT integration [10]. When 
in 2017, IBM and Maersk have announced collaboration to 
implement Blockchain technology in the supply chain, one of 
the biggest steps has been made to integrate Blockchain with 
IoT in order to transform a global supply chain [11]. Their goal 
for the year 2017 was to enable a shipment of 10 million out of 
70 million containers they ship yearly, over the Blockchain 
network [12]. IBM is making even more effort to insert 
Blockchain into the supply chain with its cooperation with 
Walmart. In order to decrease the response time of product 
recalls they are using Blockchain technology to improve track 
capabilities of food supply chain [13]. So far an integration of 
Blockchain into the supply chain has been carried out with 
transactions on self-executing smart contracts which can serve 
as a public database for tracking of the products [14, 15].  


The proposed concept is addressing the described issues of 
modern supply chain and logistics. The idea of a distributed 
network of nodes is to deal with the complexity of the systems 
on the local level. With Blockchain technology, the nodes are 
connected in a public and secure system that provides efficient 
and reliable service for procurement, storage and transport of 
products. The concept is the next step in the evolution of the 
digital platforms in logistics and its main purpose is to 


liberalize and open the way for all actors to equally take their 
part in the supply chain. 


2. Concept 


The proposed concept of the logistic platform is combining 
two technologies Internet of Things (IoT) and Blockchain in a 
new and innovative way. The structure of the platform is a 
distributed network of nodes which provide or consume 
different types of services. There is also a third group of nodes 
which are universal nodes which are ubiquitous on the 
platform, see Fig. 1. There is no central authority to supervise 
existing nodes and their actions, relying on the behaviour of the 
trustworthy actors supporting the platform because of their 
needs for it, therefore the platform will eventually reject bad 
actors and eliminate. Each node is fully autonomous and can 
communicate and cooperate with other nodes in pursuit of its 
goals. The main property of the platform is modularity which 
supports the inclusion of an unlimited number of different types 
of nodes at any given time. The main idea behind the platform 
is to define a set of elementary nodes of the platform and the 
most basic interactions between these nodes. As there is a 
possibility for other users to add their own modules to the 
system and extend already existing nodes, the platform will 
eventually converge to the optimal distributed system based on 
users demands and needs after some time. 


As all parts of the supply chain are being equipped with 
small IoT devices and the future of the supply chain is moving 
towards fully automated processes, we are taking in account 
that service providers like transportation companies have 
digitalized their services in a way that they are able to connect 
on the Internet at any given time. IoT has an important role in 
closing the gap between physical and virtual worlds and 
automation of the supply chain has made a huge step through 
the involvement of this technology. Nowadays, one of the main 
problems of the supply chain management is the growing 
complexity of the systems which is resulting in difficulties to 
assess the performance of the system. Implemented technology 
of the IoT in the supply chain enables a stream of real time 
information about the current state of single components of the 
system from anywhere in the world. So far these streams of 


Fig. 1. Concept of the platform. 










828 Nejc Rožman  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831
 Nejc Rožman et al / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  3 


information were only stored in big data centres or clouds but 
the data was not used for analytics and system improvement. 
With Blockchain, supply chain managers are finding new ways 
to incorporate and optimize the supply chain. Many believe that 
Blockchain serves as a missing piece to the puzzle of IoT, as it 
enables agreements between two parties without the 
intermediate party. Therefore, two smart devices from 
opposing parties can make an agreement in the form of a smart 
contract which is not susceptible to corruption and scams [16]. 
Microtransactions between smart devices in an extremely safe 
manner are now possible and can be executed without human 
interference if devices are programmed to do so. 


2.1. Platform nodes 


On the proposed platform we can set different types of nodes 
but there are some core nodes which are necessary for the 
platform to become operational. In these next subsections, a 
few examples of the nodes that could be used in a modern 
supply chain are described. We are also proposing technologies 
and methods for implementation of these nodes that are 
currently concerned to be good practice but can be also 
implemented differently by the users when they find better 
solutions in future. 


2.1.1. Genesis node 


As the name explains, the Genesis node is the first node of 
the platform and it holds all the information about the platform. 
It serves as an entrance point for new users to join the platform. 
Its purpose is to inform new users of the platform how the 
system works and how to create new nodes. One of the 
functions of the node is also holding a list of all elementary 
nodes on the platform and a way to find them. The Genesis 
node is implemented as a smart contract written on Blockchain. 
As long as the Blockchain network is running, all the 
information from the Genesis node is available to all users. 


2.1.2. Service node 


The Service node represents actors that are providing 
services in the supply chain. In our concept, each of them is an 
individual node, which allows them to interact with other nodes 
of the system. The node serves as a bridge between physical 
and virtual worlds for providers of the service. The main 
component of these nodes is the API (Application 
Programming Interface) in any form they want as long as it 
enables the other nodes to use it as a mean of communication 
over the Internet. The goal here is that in future, the whole 
process of providing a service would be fully automated. Fig. 
2 is representing an example of the Service node, which is 
providing transport service. The most obvious examples of 
service nodes are transporting companies and warehouses but 
there are also other possibilities like insurance companies. 
They can provide insurance in case of certain events during this 


autonomous process, for instance, if transportation is late due 
to the unforeseen events on the way.  


2.1.3. User node 


User nodes represent each user accessing the platform in 
order to communicate or cooperate with other nodes of the 
platform. Usually, users are looking for services provided by 
the Services nodes. For example, the most common user would 
probably be some production company that is looking to store 
or to transport their products and goods. Of course, it can also 
be an individual that finds some use in the platform. Packages 
are getting smarter and smarter with every device pinned to 
them and the idea is that in the future they will be able to order 
a transport or storage by themselves. The proposed platform 
provides them with a way to do it, as they reach service 
providers through their API, they can order a means of 
transport to move them to another warehouse where they 
reserved a storage place. So technically the users of the 
platform would rather be smart packages than the companies 
who are shipping the product. Companies only task would be 
to program package’s logic in a manner they would find the 
most necessary at that moment. For example, if they wanted for 
a package to get from production to the customer in the fastest 
way possible, the package would acquire offers from transport 
providers and chose the fastest possible. 


User node is composed of two parts: the first one is a 
physical package and the second one is a virtual representation 
of the package in the form of a computer program. Physical 
package is equipped with an IoT device which integrates small 
microcomputer, powerful enough to enable communication 
with the virtual package and management of the auxiliary 
components for the monitoring of the package location and 
other sensor data that are important to the package owner like 
temperature, humidity, acceleration and others. The reason 
behind virtualization of the package is to ensure sustainability 
of the system. All management processes that require more 
computations are executed away from the package on some 
other computing resources such as personal computers, servers, 
clouds or Blockchains. This way smart packaging is carrying 
fewer electronics and it is easier to recycle or furthermore, we 


Fig. 2. Service node. 






 Nejc Rožman  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831 829
4 Nejc Rožman et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


can reuse packaging if we can transfer the ownership of the 
package on the virtual level. 


2.1.4. Interface node 


The main purpose of the Interface node is to provide easy 
access for users to certain nodes with their functions and 
information. To keep the idea of a distributed system the 
implementation of the Interface node is a decentralized web 
page based on peer-to-peer technology, but normal web pages 
can also be an example of the Interface node implementation. 
Example of an Interface node would be a decentralized web 
page which extends the Genesis node. New users are more 
likely to search on the Internet for the platform and for all the 
information about how one can be involved in the system.  


2.1.5. Agreement node 


When multiple nodes of the platform reach an agreement, 
the Agreement node takes care of writing it down in the form 
of a contract. With the use of Blockchain and smart contracts, 
the terms of an agreement can be implemented in a self-
executing program. Writing down an agreement is done in four 
main phases as it is shown on Fig. 3. If the terms are being 
violated, consequences are forced immediately. All agreements 
are publicly written on Blockchain whereas the content of the 
agreement can be encrypted to enable privacy of all parties of 
the agreement. For example, when a user node accepts an offer 
for transportation of the package from certain transport 
provider, the Agreement node writes it down with the terms of 
an agreement in the smart contract. Signature is made with their 
own private keys; thus authenticity of the signature is ensured. 
A smart contract also locks-in some of the funds from both of 
the parties, as one of the parties is violating the terms of an 
agreement their locked funds are taken from the smart contract 
and are given to the opposed party according to the predefined 


measures. In case both parties fulfil their part of an agreement 
all locked funds are returned to the previous owner. 


2.1.6. Mapping node 


The Mapping node serves as a list of connections between 
information. It can connect only address of the node with the 
type of the node or it can hold much more complicated 
connections such as a discovery mechanism for the service 
nodes APIs. Implementation of the Mapping node is a smart 
contract on a Blockchain network. We are leveraging the 
Blockchain property as decentralized time immutable database 
to make our platform robust and decentralized. 


2.1.6.1. Address Resolver Node 


In order for the nodes to find each other and exchange 
messages, distributed networks have a service discovery 
mechanism. In the proposed concept of the platform, this 
mechanism is implemented via the Address Resolver Node 
(ARN) which maps certain nodes address with their IP 
addresses. ARN is extending a Mapping node and has all the 
properties of the Mapping node. ARN node is analogous to the 
DNS mechanism that map domain names with IP addresses. 
ARN contains address information of all service nodes so the 
user nodes are able to communicate with them and manage 
their supply chain. 


ARN node structure basis on the smart contract platform like 
Ethereum or EOS. Smart contract platform defines how the 
smart contract is written and how to build a smart contract API 
for the other nodes to be able to communicate with it. ARN 
node enables public listings of service providing nodes to be 
used by service consuming nodes. For example, if a new 
transport provider node wants to start offering its services it 
registers with the ARN node and its services are publicly 
available for user nodes to use.  


2.1.7. Rating node 


The Rating node is serving the platform as a mean to 
calculate the rating for each user on the platform based on their 
actions. Platform functionality is to exclude bad actors from the 
system and the Rating node is one way of doing it. Objective 
calculations of the ratings are done from the trustworthy data 
of other nodes, especially from the Agreement node where is 
written when some actor broke terms of an Agreement. Ratings 
can be calculated also in other ways. Users with the best rating 
would be rewarded, financially or in other ways, in order to 
promote fair and objective use of the platform. 


Fig. 3. Flow chart of writing an agreement to the Agreement 
node. 






830 Nejc Rožman  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831
 Nejc Rožman et al / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  5 


3. Case study 


To represent how the proposed platform would work in real 
life a case of a manufacturing company producing a particular 
product will be presented. 


Step 1 - Discovery: Together with other companies, they 
are facing challenges of managing their supply chain. They are 
in need of automated processes which can be controlled 
remotely by computers, so they can optimize their production 
and supply chain. They find the platform through the Interface 
node as the Genesis node is using it to present information 
about the platform. 


Step 2 – Exploring the platform: The Genesis node 
provides a link to all other elementary nodes of the platform. 
Because the company is looking for a service of transport for 
the product, their attention is focused towards the Mapping 
node which maps transport providers with their API. The 
Address Resolver Node (ARN) is one of the mapping nodes 
which maps providers of service with their IP address of API. 
Besides a list of all service providers, this type of node also 
describes what kind of an API service providers are using and 
what functions are integrated into the API. The main area of 
operation of the company is in Europe, therefore they find an 
ARN that is listing only providers of transport in Europe.  


Step 3 – Using the platform: As the company receives the 
list of all providers on the platform, they start sending their 
demand to the providers by using their API. Transport 
providers return their offers and the company can select the best 
option for their production. When they reach an agreement, 
everything is written on a smart contract of the Agreement 
node, where the company and transport providers sign the 
contract with their digital signatures. With the terms of the 
agreement, opposing parties also decide on the penalties in case 
of breaking the terms. Both of the parties lock a certain amount 
of funds on the smart contract. After the service is done, they 
report about the outcome, if they agree about the outcome the 
funds are distributed among both parties according to the 
written terms. To incent opposing parties of the contract to 
report correctly about the outcome, some funds locked in the 
contract are distributed also as a reward for the actors that 
confirm they broke the terms. In case that all parties of the 
contract can't reach an agreement, the funds are locked in the 
contract. The Rating node takes in account trustworthy of the 
users based on the amount of resolved conflicts on the 
Agreement node and users with the best rating would get a 
reward from the funds locked in the smart contract where there 
are still unresolved conflicts. Another provider of the service is 
also an insurance company which is another example of the 
Service node on the platform. The company decides that they 
would like to insure themselves in case of unresolved conflicts, 
the insurance company would pay for the agreement between 
the company and service providers. Insurance premiums for the 
users are based on their ratings written on the Rating node, 
which are calculated from the unresolved conflicts.  


Step 4 – Modifying the platform: The company is pleased 
with the way platform works, so they decide to upgrade their 
shipments with smart packaging. Each package is running its 
own User node and can interact with other nodes on the 
platform. Package nodes are programmed so that they fulfil the 


criteria set by the company. For example, if they want to 
transport package the cheapest way possible, the package will 
look for the cheapest offers from the service providers. While 
they are using the platform, they recognize the need for another 
feature of the Agreement node. In order to ensure the best 
quality of the product at the end point of the transport, the 
product must be shipped in the vehicle that ensures certain 
conditions. Therefore, the company can write a smart contract 
that extends the Agreement node. The new smart contract adds 
to the terms of the agreement a function which obliges transport 
company to provide a certificate from a selected institute, 
certifying that their vehicles can provide required conditions 
during the transport. 


3.1. Validation 


To validate the concept, we implemented a platform with 
the following nodes: Address resolver node, Package node, 
Transport node and a Storage node. The Address resolver node 
is a smart contract written on the Blockchain network. The 
smart contract was deployed on the test network Rinkeby. 
Package node is a consumer of the services listed on the 
Address resolver node. Transport and storage nodes are 
providers of the services and are written on the list. All of these 
nodes were implemented as IoT devices with microcomputer 


Fig. 4. The process of getting the service from the platform. 


Fig. 5. Physical model. 






 Nejc Rožman  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 826–831 831
6 Nejc Rožman et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


Raspberry Pi and were running their own REST API. For the 
physical model, we used ten package nodes, two warehouse 
nodes and one transport node. On the physical model, we ran 
different tests to determine the feasibility of the concept. In the 
first test, the initial package distribution between warehouses 
varied to verify if the package distribution converges to the 
expected equilibrium (equal number of packages in the 
warehouses) over time. The price of storing a package 
depended on the number of packages currently stored in the 
warehouse. The results show that even though tests were run 
with different initial package distributions, in time, the 
packages ended up equally distributed among the warehouses. 


A part of testing on the physical model was also a 
measurement of the overall system efficiency indicator which 
was determined by the difference between the measured real 
times of providing services and the agreed upon times. As a 
part of the experiment, we have measured the time delays of 
transport node during the service of transporting the package 
from storage to storage. At first, the transport node didn’t use 
any kind of an algorithm to determine when it should start 
driving. It reacted on the agreed times and the measured time 
delay average was 9.96 s. In the second part of the experiment, 
we implemented a simple algorithm which predicts the time of 
transport in advance. The measured time delay average with an 
implemented algorithm was 0.77 s. The results are showing that 
in order to increase system efficiency, existing nodes will have 
to optimize their own algorithms first. 


4. Conclusion 


In this work, we are proposing a new concept of distributed 
logistic platform based on Blockchain technology. The 
proposed concept of the platform is solving modern supply 
chain problems with a distributed network of nodes. By 
breaking complex logistic system on smaller parts, individual 
users of the platform are taking care of fewer processes at any 
given moment. Since the platform is providing an option for a 
fully automated supply chain, new options for the optimization 
of all processes in the supply chain are possible. Using 
Blockchain technology as the basis for the platform is not only 
allowing the users to write down agreements in the self-
executing smart contracts without an intermediate person, but 
it is also a way for trustworthy public announcements of 
services. Furthermore, new technology can publicly display 
untampered information on compliance with the agreements of 
individual platform users. This kind of trustworthy information 
can affect the position of every actor on the free market. We 
see the limitation of the proposed concept of the platform in the 
critical mass of users. In order for the platform to work the way 
it is meant to be, there has to be a certain number of users who 
are supporting the platform. Only when the users will create 
new nodes and change the platform according to the users’ 
demands and needs, the platform will truly be functional. 
Considering that the platform is providing an alternative way 
for smaller supply chain companies to join the global market 
and is undermining monopolies of the bigger companies, it is 
expected a lack of interest for the platform from their side. But 
if they want to be a part of the digital supply chain, they will 
have to provide their own platform or join an existing one. Our 


work in future will be focused towards the implementation of 
all proposed nodes in the concept.  


Acknowledgements 


This work was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency 
under the funding “Young researchers” and under Grant P2-
0270 and by the Ministry of Higher Education, Science and 
Technology of the Republic of Slovenia, grant no. C3330-16-
529000. 


References 


[1] World Economic Forum. Digital Transformation of Industries Logistics 
Industry.  Geneva: WEF; 2016. 


[2] Fernie J, Sparks L. Logistics and retail management  emerging issues and 
new challenges in the retail supply chain. 5th ed., Great Britain; 2019.  


[3] Christopher M. Logistics & Supply chain managemen. 5thed., Great Britain: 
Pearson; 2016. 


[4] Varma VA, Reklaitis GV, Blau GE, Pekny JF. Enterprise-wide modeling 
& optimization—An overview of emerging research challenges and 
opportunities. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 31(5–6), Elsevier; 
2007. p. 692–711. 


[5] Gallay O, Korpela K, Tapio N, Nurminen JK. A peer-to-peer platform for 
decentralized logistics. In: Proceedings of the Hamburg International 
Conference of Logistics (HICL): 2017 Oct 12-14; Hamburg, Germany. 
Berlin: Epubli; 2017. p. 19-34. 


[6] Hackius N, Petersen M. lockchain in logistics and supply chain  trick or 
treat? In: Proceedings of the Hamburg International Conference of 
Logistics (HICL): 2017 Oct 12-14; Hamburg, Germany. Berlin: Epubli; 
2017. p. 3-18. 


[7] Abeyratne S, Monfared R. (2016). Blockchain Ready Manufacturing 
Supply Chain Using Distributed Ledger. International Journal of Research 
in Engineering and Technology. 05. 


[8] Zhi Li, W.M. Wang, Guo Liu, Layne Liu, Jiadong He, G.Q. Huang, 
(2018) "Toward open manufacturing: A cross-enterprises knowledge 
and services exchange framework based on blockchain and edge 
computing", Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 118 Issue: 1, 
pp.303-320, https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-04-2017-0142. 


[9] Zhi Li, Layne Liu, Ali Vatankhah Barenji, Waiming Wang. Cloud-based 
Manufacturing Blockchain: Secure Knowledge Sharing for Injection 
Mould Redesign. Procedia CIRP, Volume 72, 2018, Pages 961-966, ISSN 
2212-8271, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.004. 


[10] Korpela K, Hallikas J, Dahlberg T. Digital Supply Chain Transformation 
toward Blockchain Integration. In: Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS): 2017 Jan 4-7; Waikoloa Village, Hawaii; 2017. 
p. 4182-4191. 


[11] IBM. Maersk and IBM Unveil First Industry-Wide Cross-Border Supply 
Chain Solution on Blockchain. IBM News room; 2017. Available from: 
URL: https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/51712.wss. 


[12] Allison I. Maersk and IBM want 10 million shipping containers on the 
global supply blockchain by year-end. 2018. Available from: URL: 
https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/maersk-ibm-aim-get-10-million-shipping-
containers-onto-global-supply-blockchain-by-year-end-1609778. 


[13] Galvin D. IBM and Walmart: Blockchain for Food Safety. IBM 
Corporation; 2017. Available from: https://www-
01.ibm.com/events/wwe/grp/grp308.nsf/vLookupPDFs/6 Using 
Blockchain for Food Safe 2/$file/6 Using Blockchain for Food Safe 2.pdf. 


[14] Tian F. An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on 
RFID & blockchain technology. In: 13th International Conference on 
Service Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM): 2016 Jun 24-26; 
Kunming, China. New Jersey: IEEE; 2016. p. 1-6. 


[15] Wüst K, Gervais A. Do you Need a Blockchain? In: Crypto Valley 
Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT): 2018 Jun 20-22; Zug, 
Switzerland. New Jersey: IEEE; 2018. p. 45-54. 


[16] Christidis K, Devetsikiotis M. Blockchains and Smart Contracts for the 
Internet of Things.  IEEE Access, 4, IEEE; 2016. p. 2292-2303. 




