









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Government Information Quarterly


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/govinf


From conventional governance to e-democracy: Tracing the evolution of e-
governance research trends using network analysis tools


N. Bindu, C. Prem Sankar, K. Satheesh Kumar⁎


Department of Futures Studies, University of Kerala, Kariavattom, Kerala 695 581, India


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Citation network analysis
E-governance
Main path analysis
Cluster analysis
Symbiosis maturity model


A B S T R A C T


The adoption of e-governing practices has revolutionised the administrative machinery of governments world-
wide by improving efficiency, transparency, and accountability. Researchers and administrators often aim to
identify emerging research fronts and the timeline of the evolution to forecast and implement technology. In this
work, we systematically investigate the trajectory of the global evolution and emerging research fronts as well as
the prospects for e-governance using citation network analysis. The growth curve fitted to the number of articles
published per year shows that the research activities are still in the ascendant phase. We visualise the global
main path of the citation network and investigate the patterns to trace the knowledge diffusion path, major
milestones, and emerging research fronts. The cluster analysis identifies the major topics of research as ad-
ministration and information system management, e-governance framework design, efficiency or quality eva-
luation, and the application of social networks and open data leading to e-democracy. The adoption of open data
and social networking for user interactions with government that leads to participatory governance are the
emerging research trends. We also identify research that can have a future impact based on network parameters.
The results contribute to the literature by setting the focus of future research, and assisting administrators in
selecting suitable models and methodologies, and manufacturers with the development of required technical
devices suitable for the upcoming phase of symbiosis.


1. Introduction


The revolutionary growth of e-governance in the recent past has
resulted in efficiency, accountability, and transparency, and enhanced
citizen engagement in the governments' strategic decision-making
processes. Almost all countries have at least some form of online service
for their citizens (Nations, 2014). The number of countries scoring high
on the E-governance Development Index (EGDI) increased from 10 in
2003 to 29 in 2016 (Peña-López et al., 2016). According to the United
Nations, the main objective of an e-government is to deliver govern-
ment information and services to citizens by utilising the Internet and
the world-wide-web (Nations, 2005). The term E-governance has a wider
meaning concerning the use of information and communication tech-
nologies (ICTs) to enhance the governance process and support e-De-
mocracy, e-Government, and e-Business (Bannister & Connolly, 2011;
Holmes, 2001; Okot-Uma & London, 2000). E-governance is the appli-
cation of electronic means for the interaction between government and ci-
tizens and government and businesses, as well as in internal government
operations to simplify and improve democratic, government and business
aspects of Governance (Backus, 2001). The definition of e-governance


has changed over time to accommodate evolutionary changes in related
fields. According to the definition by Marche and McNiven (2003), e-
governance is a technology-mediated relationship between citizens and their
governments from the perspective of potential electronic deliberation over
civic communication, over policy evolution and in democratic expressions of
citizen will.


E-governance at its preliminary stage was confined to the digitisa-
tion and storage of enormous volumes of manual documents, but the
rapid advancement of ICTs started the era of digitisation & communica-
tion, which also revolutionised e-governance administration to reach
the level of multi-channel delivery of e-services for daily life (Feroz
Khan, Young Yoon, Kim, & Woo Park, 2014; Rana, Dwivedi, Williams, &
Weerakkody, 2016; Reddick, 2005; Sivarajah, Irani, & Weerakkody,
2015). Research and development (R&D) in fields related to e-govern-
ance development, transformation, and implementation models;
benchmarking and evaluation models; innovation, diffusion, and
adoption models; re-engineering frameworks; efficiency; assessment,
and so on contributed significantly to the overall improvement in the
quality of e-governance. E-governance models are implemented in E-
services (connecting citizens with their government), E-administration


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.005
Received 4 October 2017; Received in revised form 2 January 2019; Accepted 27 February 2019


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kskumar@keralauniversity.ac.in (K.S. Kumar).


Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


Available online 09 March 2019
0740-624X/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/0740624X

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/govinf

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.005

mailto:kskumar@keralauniversity.ac.in

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.005

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.giq.2019.02.005&domain=pdf




(improving government processes), and E-society (building interactions
with and within civil society) (Heeks, 1999). Each is implemented in
three stages, viz., Business Process Automation (BPA), Business Process
Improvement (BPI), and Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) (Moon,
2002; Moon & Norris, 2005; van Reijswoud & de Jager, 2007). Never-
theless, the economy of a country is the major factor affecting the im-
plementation of e-governance. However, recent reports indicate that
several other determinants play critical roles in the successful im-
plementation of e-governance such as user trust and adaptability, per-
ceived usefulness, and the relative advantage of promoting e-govern-
ance. The compact network structures that integrate information
procurement, dissemination, and management greatly contribute to
convenient public administration. The virtual media of the internet,
apart from mass media channels, put considerable pressure on the
stakeholders of e-government, prompting them to follow the tenets of
the religion, culture, and society (Savolainen, 2016). Hence, the socio-
cultural factors evolving from the social norms and cultural values are
significant determinants that influence stakeholders' acceptance of e-
services (Seng, Jackson, & Philip, 2010).


R&D in various domains has significantly promoted the diversity
and rapid growth of e-governance applications, among which the ad-
vancement of ICT is the major contributor. The introduction of smart-
phones and Web 2.0+ technologies are notable examples. The land-
scape of the research domain is characterised by diversity and the
emergence of numerous multi-disciplinary sub-domains. The develop-
ments in the fields of Management, Computer Science, Electronics, and
Communication Engineering reflect in the administrative systems of the
e-governance domain that are advancing in parallel, as the improved
government processes and interactions between government and civil
society show (Heeks, 1999; Moon, 2002; Moon & Norris, 2005; van
Reijswoud & de Jager, 2007).


Recent advancements in ICT have significantly improved the effi-
ciency in the delivery of e-service and promoted citizens' participation
in their government's decision-making process (Peña-López et al.,
2016). As per the recent trends, e-governance is expected to empower
citizens to participate in the government's strategic decision-making
process and provide access to data related to decision-making (de Jager
& van Reijswoud, 2008; Feroz Khan et al., 2014; Nam, 2017; Peña-
López et al., 2016; Porumbescu, 2015; Rodríguez-Bolvíar, Alcaide-
Muñoz, & Cobo, 2018; Susha, Zuiderwijk, Janssen, & Grönlund, 2015;
Weerakkody, El-Haddadeh, Al-Sobhi, Shareef, & Dwivedi, 2013). Re-
cently, e-democracy and e-participation are buzzwords associated with
e-governance. They refer to online activities including online discus-
sions and consultations among governments, elected representatives,
political parties, and citizens as part of a democratic process (Palvia &
Sharma, 2007). The functions of ICT-based democracy (e-Democracy)
are described by Kim (2008) as follows: E-democracy articulates political
and democratic procedures involving citizens in societal decision-making in
various ways through the use of ICT. Royo and Yetano (2015) view e-
participation as a cost-effective tool to actively involve citizens in govern-
ment activities. Hence e-participation is one of the defining character-
istics in exercising e-Democracy, as Macintosh (2004), Smith and
Dalakiouridou (2009), and Linders (2012) illustrate. Open governments
share information that is critical for decision making by technologists,
policy-makers, and citizens.


A research review is a potential source to provide an overview of the
dynamic development of knowledge that consequently helps re-
searchers extend the current theories and develop new theories
(Webster & Watson, 2002). It also helps to uncover the areas that need
further attention from researchers by constructing suitable research
frameworks, especially on emerging research fronts. There are several
research reviews in the domain of e-governance, which portray the
vivid spectrum of research activities in related topics, including the
transition and transformation of e-service delivery patterns, im-
plementation and re-engineering models, assessment, benchmarking,
and so on (Bolvar, Muñoz, & Hernández, 2010; Chadwick, 2003; Dawes,


2008; Grönlund & Horan, 2005; Irani, Love, & Montazemi, 2007; Yildiz,
2007). Meijer and Bekkers (2015) attempted to frame a metatheory to
reduce confusion on fragmented theoretical studies on e-government
for further development. Bannister and Grönlund (2017) provided a
brief historical evolution of the contribution of ICT to e-government
and noted that a systematic historical survey to trace their evolution has
yet to be undertaken. Technological development plays a significant
role in the successful implementation of many e-government initiatives.
However, in the past, administrators tended to embrace the latest
technologies before fully exploiting or implementing older ones, which
resulted in several incomplete projects according to Bannister and
Connolly (2012). The structured time-sensitive checkpoint analysis of e-
government research by Joseph (2013) identified three trends: the first
deals with studies that are either conceptual or rely solely on secondary
data sources for the analysis; the second deals with studies that focus on
geographic locations; and the third set of studies has no dominant topic,
indicating the vast diversity of subjects in the field. Medaglia and Zheng
(2017) analysed the presence of governments on social media platforms
and observed that most studies focused on governments rather than
users. They also opined that the typical characteristics of social media
platforms and the relationship among the constructs of the government
social media phenomenon are under-investigated. Sæbø, Rose, and Flak
(2008) reviewed the status of e-participation and suggested a model for
emerging research fronts and its initial content. Many authors also
traced the community of leading contributors to the field of e-govern-
ance (Chen, Jubilado, Capistrano, & Yen, 2015; Erman, 2009; Erman &
Todorovski, 2010; Scholl, 2009, 2014).


Regardless of the availability of these reviews, the dynamics of in-
novations and R&D in e-governance has not been investigated system-
atically as the interdisciplinary nature of e-governance, ranging from
ICT to sociology, caused many reviewers to focus on a particular theme
related to e-governance. A comprehensive understanding of the impact
of these inter-linkages on the knowledge structure of e-governance is
currently limited, as previous reviews did not scrutinise the main
pathways of historical developments linking various themes and topics
of research. The unfolding of the temporal development of research
trends is useful for the successful strategic planning of e-governance for
administrators and policy makers. The conventional methods employed
in most of these reviews limited the focal theme, data sets, or time
spans, but the increasing volume of research articles and the diversity of
the research trends demand the use of efficient computing techniques to
process the vast collection of bibliometric information. The corpus of
research articles is a reliable source of innovations in early indicators.
The main objective of this study is to investigate the dynamics of R&D
activities in e-governance by analysing the corpus of research articles
using the tools of social network analysis (SNA). The use of SNA tools
has been emerging as a fruitful methodology for analysing a research
discipline more objectively (Otte & Rousseau, 2002). Erman (2009)
suggested this approach as a unified methodology to investigate inter-
disciplinary research on e-governance, but the analysis was restricted to
the author citation network. In a later work, Erman and Todorovski
(2010) analysed the co-author network limited to EGOV Conference
Community and Saip, Kamala, and Tassabehji (2016) identified the core
clusters based on factor analysis.


SNA has been employed in various domains to gain insights into the
structure of complex relations among actors in a network (Barabási,
Albert, & Jeong, 2000; Barabási, Gulbahce, & Loscalzo, 2011; Colizza,
Barrat, Barthélemy, & Vespignani, 2006; Ebel, Mielsch, & Bornholdt,
2002; Sankar, Asokan, & Kumar, 2015; Vázquez, Flammini, Maritan, &
Vespignani, 2003; Wang, González, Hidalgo, & Barabási, 2009). A ci-
tation network is a directed network in which nodes are the articles and
citations are the edges that can be traversed for the major paths of
information flow on the evolution of research fronts, following the
principles of network theory. Recently, citation network analysis (CNA)
has emerged as a systematic and scientific method of analysing research
articles in an area to identify research fronts, evolving techniques, and


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


386






future trends. A complex network formed by citations is the niche of
information from the evolution of the area to research fronts. Bor-
rowing tools from SNA, CNA evolved as a computer-based technology
forecasting tool and an alternative to an expert-based approach
(Kajikawa & Takeda, 2009; Rodríguez Bolvíar, Alcaide Muñoz, & López
Hernández, 2016; Shibata, Kajikawa, & Matsushima, 2007; Shibata,
Kajikawa, Takeda, Sakata, & Matsushima, 2011). In this work we
analyse the citation network of research articles on e-governance to
obtain a holistic picture of the knowledge structure of the area in terms
of the sub-domains and their theme-wise connections by extracting the
main path of evolution and various clusters.


The rest of the paper is organised as follows. The second section
presents a detailed description of the data, and the CNA methodology,
which uses techniques from Main Path analysis and Cluster analysis. This
section also provides the assessment details of the network parameters
to find the emerging clusters as well as the emerging research topics
and a parametric equation to find the highly proficient articles therein.
The results in the third section are summarised in the fourth section.
The results and their implications are discussed in the fifth section.


2. Methodology


In this work, we adopt a two-pronged approach of carrying out the
main path and cluster analysis of the citation network of research ar-
ticles on e-governance. The schema of the analysis is given in Fig. 1. The
first step involved in this study is to construct the citation network of e-
governance by collecting citation data from Web of Science (WoS). The
next step is to extract the largest component for further analysis.


The main path in an acyclic directed network is the chain of links
connecting the most significant nodes. The first step for obtaining the
main path of a citation network is to assign a weight to each directed
link connecting two nodes. Three major measures suggested by
Hummon and Dereian (1989) for estimating the weights of the links are
Node Pair Projection Count (NPPC), Search Path Node Pair (SPNP) and
Search Path Link Count (SPLC). The SPLC of a directed link counts all
possible search paths within the acyclic network originating from the
tail node of the link and its ancestral nodes (Batagelj, 2003; Hummon &
Dereian, 1989). In other words, the SPLC of a given link gives the count
of all search paths in the network traversed through the link. The index
SPLC is presumed to be the best measure to be considered as traversal
weight, as SPLC gains high value, if more number of search paths pass
through it (Batagelj, 2003; Hummon, Doreian, & Freeman, 1990). The
main path in a citation network is constructed, starting from a source
node, by adding links with the highest weight step by step until a sink
node is reached. Each link in a main path facilitate diffusion of


knowledge to the publications at a later date and hence is widely used
to trace the trajectories of scientific evolution (Garfield, Sher, & Torpie,
1964; Hummon et al., 1990; Hummon & Carley, 1993; Hummon &
Dereian, 1989; Liu, Chen, Ho, & Li, 2014). Garfield et al. (1964) ob-
served the correspondence between the historical account of the events
and citation relations. The nodes in the main path represent milestones
in the evolution of a research domain. The priority search algorithm
proposed by Hummon and Dereian (1989) adopts a local approach in
selecting links of a main path and hence the total traversal count may
not be the largest of the traversal counts of all paths in the network. The
sum of the traversal count of all the links in a global main path is the
largest of all possible paths. The first step of obtaining a global main
path is to identify the link with the highest traversal count emanating
from all sources. The beginning node of this link is the first node of the
global main path. The next link of the global main path is obtained by
the same procedure, starting from the end node the first identified link
and continued until a sink node is reached. In case of ties, all links with
the tie are considered. In this work, we constructed the global main
path as implemented in the software package PAJEK (Batagelj & Mrvar,
1998).


We carried out the global main path analysis inspecting all the
possible global main paths to trace the knowledge flow through the
articles that are milestones in the history of the evolution of e-gov-
ernance representing the emergence and divergence of research
streams. The main path algorithm in the citation network involves two
phases in which the first phase is to create a weighted citation network
and assign significant traversal weight to the links based on their ability
to diffuse knowledge. The second phase is to execute priority search
algorithm for selecting the most significant follower of an article based
on the traversal weight of links attached to it. The priority search al-
gorithm selects the next connecting link of a node as the one with the
largest traversal weight and iterates the procedure for all the links from
source to sinks (Liu & Lu, 2012).


The topological clustering of the largest component for identifying
the diversity of streams in a research domain was suggested by Newman
(2004). The nodes in a particular cluster are connected more with the
nodes in the same cluster than with nodes of other clusters. The clus-
tering algorithm based on modularity computes the quantity Q given by


∑= ⎡
⎣⎢


− ⎛
⎝


⎞
⎠


⎤
⎦⎥


Q
ls
l


ds
l2


Nm


1


2


(1)


where Nm is the number of clusters, l is the total number of links, ls is
the number of links between the nodes in cluster S and ds is the sum of
degrees of the nodes in the cluster (Blondel, Guillaume, Lambiotte, &
Lefebvre, 2008; Newman & Girvan, 2004). Each term in Eq. (1)


Fig. 1. The schema of the analysis.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


387






corresponding to a cluster is the difference between the fraction of links
that fall within the cluster and the expected value of the same quantity
if the links are distributed randomly without considering cluster
structures. A high value of Q indicates a good division of the network
into clusters.


After clustering the giant component of the citation network, the
role of each paper within a cluster is investigated based on z-score
defined by


=
−


z
k k


σ
i


i s


k


i


si (2)


where ki is the number of links of node i to other nodes in its cluster si,
ksi is the average of k over nodes in cluster si and σksi is the standard
deviation Guimerá & Amaral, 2005; Shibata et al., 2011), (Power,
Schlaggar, Lessov-Schlaggar, & Petersen, 2013). The z-score measures
how well-connected a node within its cluster and it can be utilised to
assess the prominence of a node in its cluster. The links of a node may
be limited to its cluster or distributed across other clusters. The parti-
cipation coefficient given by


∑ ⎜ ⎟= − ⎛
⎝


⎞
⎠−


p
k
k


1i
s


N
is


i1


2M


(3)


measures the role of connections of a node to nodes in different clusters
where kis is the number of links of node i to nodes in cluster s and ki is
the total degree of node i. The value of pi is 0 if all links are within its
cluster and close to 1 if its links are distributed uniformly among other
clusters. These indices were introduced first by Guimerá and Amaral
(2005) for analysing biological networks and classified nodes into non-
hub nodes and hub nodes. The non-hub nodes with zi < 2.5 is further
divided in to four categories (i) ultra-peripheral nodes with pi < 0.05
(ii) peripheral nodes with 0.05 < pi≤ 0.62 (iii) non-hub connect
nodes with 0.62 < pi≤ 0.80 and (iv) non-hub kinless nodes with
pi > 0.80. The hub nodes with zi≥ 2.5 can be classified further into (v)
provincial hubs with pi≤ 0.30, (vi) connector hubs with
0.30 < pi≤ 0.75 and kinless hubs with pi > 0.75. According to
Shibata et al. (2011), a cluster with hub papers of large z-score and
small p values, different topic of discussion from other clusters, and
articles with recent publication dates are typical features of an emer-
ging cluster. An article in the emerging cluster with highest value of
betweenness centrality is the most promising one in the citation net-
work (Shibata et al., 2011).


For identifying the research topic of each cluster, the content ana-
lysis was made automated with Natural Language Processing (NLP)
based on the procedure proposed by Shibata et al. (2011) using ab-
stracts of the articles. We finally compared the nodes in the main path
with clusters to detect the stage-wise development of sub-domains.


3. Results


We retrieved the citation data for the research articles on e-gov-
ernment published from 1989 to 2016 from the Web of Science (WoS)
by using the keywords e-government, egovernment, e-governance, or ego-
vernance as query terms. We considered only research articles and
avoided review papers and other materials without any restriction on
language. The retrieved information was subsequently converted to a
citation network. The citation network contains 89,638 nodes con-
sisting of the retrieved articles and the references therein, and 116,790
directed edges or links. The giant component of the network contains
60,597 nodes and 86,204 edges. We show the fitted growth curve


=
+ − −


f t
α


e
( )


1
.


t β γ( ( )/ ) (4)


to the number of year-wise retrieved cited articles using Eq.4 in Fig. 2.
The number of articles at present shows that the research area is still in
the growth and diffusion phase, and has not reached maturity. This


indicates the future scope of research and development in e-governance
and that it can attain higher growth.


3.1. Tracing the evolution trajectory


We traced the evolution of the research activities using main path
analysis (Batagelj, 2003; Hummon & Dereian, 1989). We obtained the
global main path in the citation network using the algorithm described
in the previous section based on SPLC. Fig. 3 shows the global main
path extracted from the citation network. Table 1 lists the articles in the
global main path. The analysis of the topics discussed in the core nodes
in the main path can shed light on the evolution of the research ac-
tivities in the area. The main path consists of the single base path with
two major emerging branches. The main path of the evolution of e-
governance shows four phases based on the research topics.


With the extensive use of the internet worldwide after 1990, e-
governance research became vibrant, dynamic, and trended towards
the construction of models to implement e-services. The models helped
in the transition of the conventional hierarchy to an e-services-based
system in an integrated and standardized manner. The main path de-
rived by our analysis starts with an article on the degree and type of
social interactivity with the internet by Stowers (1999) and it was the
motivation behind subsequent articles by Kaylor, Deshazo, and Van Eck
(2002), McNeal, Tolbert, Mossberger, and Dotterweich (2003), and
Thomas and Streib (2003). Kaylor et al. (2002) and Thomas and Streib
(2003) investigated the benchmarking and evaluation of the degree to
which a government website interacts with its users. McNeal et al.
(2003) evaluated existing e-governance information systems based on
the maturity models suggested by Layne and Lee (2001) and Ho and
Coates (2002).


In the early stages of e-governance development, the digitisation
process was not carried out in an integrated manner, resulting in system
failures and chaos. The emphasis in the first phase of the evolution of e-
governance spanning the period up to 2005 was on the development of
a well-structured framework for transforming conventional adminis-
trative systems to digital government platforms. Different maturity
models were introduced to integrate the data and administrative fra-
meworks in connection with the transformation of manual systems to
digital and automated systems. The main path captures the maturity
models proposed by Layne and Lee (2001), Chen and Gant (2001), and
Ho and Coates (2002). These articles framed the basic structure of e-
administration in the history of e-governance development. Layne and
Lee (2001) utilised multiple data sets and methods of analysis to
characterise participants' behavioural patterns. The study also analysed
the core factors contributing to major challenges to e-government im-
plementation. The maturity model of the implementation of e-govern-
ance proposed by Layne and Lee (2001) is widely accepted as a major
reference model by many subsequent researchers. The article addressed
various issues connected with transforming conventional adminis-
trative systems to e-government systems. Another model proposed by
Chen and Gant (2001) in the same year, which analysed the efficient
use of Application Service Providers (ASP) to transfer e-government
benefits at the local administration level, also attracted the attention of
many researchers. Doty and Erdelez (2002) carried out an analytical
study based on the findings of Chen and Gant (2001). The core of re-
search in e-governance focused on developing models until the start of
the 21st century, and it dramatically helped with e-governance im-
plementation. The period up to 2005 can be considered as the first
phase of development.


With the widespread use of the internet and other electronic com-
munication gadgets, stakeholders began to accept the switchover from
conventional to e-governments, and began adopting e-services. The
next issue to arise was the evaluation of the implemented e-services.
Assessing and benchmarking the quality, performance, user adoption,
and customer satisfaction were the major tasks in the second phase of
the main path. During this phase, the evaluation and assessment of


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


388






implemented e-governance initiatives were the prominent research
trends. The divergence in research streams in the second phase is evi-
dent from the articles by Reddick (2005) and Grant and Chau (2006), as
Fig. 3 shows. The issues related to the transformation of the existing e-
governance information systems and the development of a strong e-
governance structural framework were the research themes of Grant
and Chau (2006). This study was extended to a customer-centric e-
government maturity model focusing on end-users by Andersen and
Henriksen (2006). It was later known as the Public sector Process Re-
building (PPR) model, which is an extension of work done by Layne and
Lee (2001).


The second branch of bifurcation in the second phase started with
(Reddick, 2005), which triggered the search for methods to increase the
interaction between citizens and the government. The article pointed
out the need for alternate communication channels and laid the step-
ping stones for a revolutionary change by incorporating social media
and other social networks to increase interactions between the gov-
ernment and the public. The next bifurcation of research was initiated
by Reddick (2005). The focus of the first branch is the implications of
rules in an administration hierarchy to promote e-democracy, while
that of the second branch is on the implementation of e-democracy in
the e-governance hierarchy.


The research trend in the third phase is social media adoption,
which is a paradigm shift from the previous mainstream research. It was
triggered by the work of Helbig, Gil-Garca, and Ferro (2009), which
converges the knowledge streams in the second phase. This was an
extensive study on the digital divide existing in society in terms of
accessing e-governance services. This article paved the way for the
exotic use of electronic media for implementing seamless interactions
between the government and its stakeholders. Following the same line
of research, Verdegem and Verleye (2009) conducted a user acceptance
study and proposed a conceptual model based on ICT acceptance theory
and confirmed the start of the third phase in the main path of e-gov-
ernance development. The third phase of research was on increasing
customer-centric interactions using multi-channel communication, in-
cluding social media. The article by Gauld, Goldfinch, and Horsburgh
(2010) focused on the need for seamless communication requirements
in e-governance, prompted by the observations of Verdegem and
Verleye (2009). The article by Reddick and Turner (2012) is a re-
markable piece of work related to the upcoming trend of multi-channel
communication, including social media, which is considered a panacea
to overcome the digital divide in society. Social media adoption in e-
governance to promote e-democracy and participatory government is


an emerging research trend. Social media, including social networks
such as Facebook and Twitter, are the future channels for implementing
seamless interactions between stakeholders and the government, as
anticipated in the final stage of the maturity models. Following the
research thread in this article, Andersen, Medaglia, and Henriksen
(2012) conducted an extensive study on the relevance of social net-
working in e-governance.


The elaborate study by Feroz Khan et al. (2014), based on the work
of Andersen et al. (2012), was followed by other researchers focusing
on social networking and alternate channels for government-to-citizen
(G2C) interactions. The core of the research by Feroz Khan et al. (2014)
lay in the perspectives of transition from e-government to social or
participative government. It initiated the fourth phase of the main path
with research trends on e-democracy and related topics. In the emer-
ging future trends in e-governance, known as E-democracy or partici-
pative governance, citizens gain more prominence in the hierarchical
structure of the government administration. They can interactively
participate in the government's strategic decision-making process
through social media by casting opinion votes and can resolve social
and political issues through group discussions on Facebook, Twitter,
and other social networks. Social media will be helpful in emergency
situations, including natural calamities, as information reaches end-
users faster in this way than by any other means. Bonsón, Royo, and
Ratkai (2015) extended the scope of the topic of e-democracy by ela-
borating on the findings of Feroz Khan et al. (2014). The article dis-
cussed the impact of different media and stakeholders' roles in Western
European local government social media pages. Bonsón et al. (2015)
motivated Porumbescu (2015) to correlate government transparency
with the increase in citizens' trust in the government, which enhanced
the use of social media for G2C interactions. Porumbescu (2016a)
carried out case studies on South Korea as an extension of his previous
work (Porumbescu, 2015) to relate the propensity of citizens' trust in
the government with the increase in e-services adoption. Extending his
previous work, Porumbescu (2016b) assessed the relationship between
trust and perceptions of public sector performance. This study triggered
efforts by Nam (2016) to analyse the consistency of technological
readiness for e-participation with the level of civil liberties. Nam (2017)
conducted another study based on the findings of Porumbescu (2016a)
and analysed the pros and cons of e-democracy. Considering the results
obtained by Porumbescu (2016b), Nam (2016) analysed citizens' atti-
tudes towards open government and predicted that the next trend of
research will be on the use of smart mobile applications and open data.


The topics revealed by the content analysis of the articles at the end


0


2000


4000


6000


8000


1990 2000 2010 2020 2030


Year


N
u
m


b
e
r 


o
f 
a
rt


ic
le


s


Fig. 2. The growth curve in Eq. (4) fitted to the yearly published articles.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


389






of the main path in Fig. 3 shows that e-governance is gaining popularity
with the support of tools such as smartphones and Web2.0+ tech-
nology. The main path reveals that the major topics of discussion in the
articles published at the end of the third phase and at the start of the
fourth phase are related to seamless user interactions with government
through social media, participatory governance, e-democracy, and trans-
parency provided by open data. In the fourth phase starting from 2012,
assessments of the user adoption of e-democracy, social networks, and open
data implementation gained prominence.


3.2. Roadmap of major themes


The main path depicted in Fig. 3 indicates the milestone articles of
the evolution of the domain. We extracted the themes of these articles
using a content analysis. The themes represent four major phases of
evolution in e-governance. The themes of the sequential evolution of
mainstream research on e-governance embedded in the main path, viz.,
information system frameworks and maturity models (Phase 1); evaluation
models, user satisfaction, and user adoption models (Phase 2); multi-


Layne K, 2001


Porumbescu GA, 2016 (a)


Nam T, 2017


Ho Atk, 2002


Bonson E, 2015


Verdegem P, 2009


Porumbescu G, 2015


Andersen KV, 2006


Reddick CG, 2004


Gauld R, 2010


Thomas JC, 2003


Kaylor C, 2001


Helbig N, 2009


Reddick CG, 2012


Reddick CG, 2005


Gil-garcia JR, 2007


Andersen KN, 2012


Khan GF, 2014


Jaeger PT, 2005


Mcneal RS, 2003


Porumbescu GA, 2016 (b)


Nam T, 2016


Grant G, 2005


Doty P, 2002


Stowers GN, 1999


Chen YC, 2001


Fig. 3. The global main path of the e-governance literature.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


390






channel communication, increasing user interaction, and social media
(Phase 3); e-democracy, e-participation, social media including social net-
works, and open data (Phase 4), clearly indicate the roadmap ahead, as
Fig. 4 illustrates. The themes marked at the end of the roadmap show
the future research trends. The analysis shows that e-governance started
with the conventional mode of service delivery and reached the stage of
participative governance characterised by citizens' active involvement
in the strategic decision-making process of government utilising
Web2.0 and social network platforms. These results are further corro-
borated by the cluster analysis in the next section.


3.3. Cluster analysis


We adopted the following steps to conduct the cluster analysis of the
giant component.


Step 1. Identify the main clusters of the giant component of the
citation network.


Step 2. Identify the research topics of the main clusters using NLP
tools for the titles and abstracts of articles in a cluster.


Step 3. Trace the evolution of clusters by constructing the main path


within each cluster. The nodes in the main path also show the critical
papers in a cluster.


Step 4. Compute z-scores and participation coefficients (p) of the
nodes in each cluster to investigate the role of each node and the be-
tweenness centrality of the emerging clusters.


Step 5. Corroborate the results with that of the main path analysis.
The clustering of the giant component following the algorithm in


Blondel et al. (2008) yielded four significant clusters, as we show in
Fig. 5. Table 2 lists the research topics of each cluster. Cluster #1 is the
largest cluster (41.56%) and contains a broad spectrum of articles
consisting of 25,188 nodes with multiple research topics and recent
innovations. Therefore, we carried out a sub-clustering of cluster #1
and analysed the seven major sub-clusters. Table 3 provides the asso-
ciated topics. The sub-clusters #1, #2, and #5 discuss the evaluation,
benchmarking, and maturity models, while sub-clusters #3 and #4
discuss open government, e-participation, and e-democracy. Sub-cluster
#6 talks about the issues that arose during the transformation from
conventional to participatory governance (e-democracy). The foci of
sub-cluster #7 are strategic decision-making, and policy and framework
creation for e-governance implementation. We also constructed the


Table 1
Articles in the main path in Fig. 3.


Phase Node Publication details


1 Stowers GN, 1999 Stowers G N,1999 Becoming cyber-active: State and local government on the world wide web. Government Inform, Quarterly (16)(2)
111–127


1 Kaylor C, 2001 Kaylor, C., Deshazo, R., Van Eck, D., 2002. E-government: A report on implementing services among American cities., Government
Information Quarterly 18 (4), 293–307


1 Chen, Y.-C., 2001 Chen, Y.-C.,Gant, J.,2001. Transforming e-government services: The use of application service providers in, US local governments. AMCIS
2001 Proceedings, 308.


1 Layne, K., 2001 Layne, K., Lee, J., 2001. Developing fully functional e-government: A, four stage model. Government information quarterly 18 (2), 122–136
1 Ho, A. T.-K., 2002 Ho, A. T.-K., Coates, P., 2002. Citizen participation: Legitimizing performance measurement as a decision tool. Government Finance Review


18 (2), 8–11.
1 Doty, P., 2002 Doty, P., Erdelez, S., 2002. Information micro-practices in Texas rural courts: Methods and issues for e-government. Government


Information Quarterly 19 (4), 369–387.
1 Thomas, J. C., 2003 Thomas, J. C., Streib, G., 2003. The new face of government: citizen-initiated contacts in the era of e-government. Journal of public


administration research and theory 13 (1), 83–102
1 McNeal, R. S., 2003 McNeal, R. S., Tolbert, C. J., Mossberger, K., Dotterweich, L. J., 2003. Innovating in digital government in the American states. Social


Science Quarterly 84 (1), 52–70.
1 Reddick, C. G., 2004 Reddick, C. G., 2004. A two-stage model of e-government growth: Theories and empirical evidence for US cities. Government Information


Quarterly 21 (1), 51–64.
2 Grant, G., 2006 Grant, G., Chau, D., 2006. Developing a generic framework for e-government. Advanced Topics in Information Management 5 (1), 72–94.
2 Reddick, C. G., 2005 Reddick, C. G., 2005. Citizen interaction with e-government: From the streets to servers? Government Information Quarterly 22 (1), 38–57.
2 Jaeger, P. T., 2005 Jaeger, P. T., 2005. Deliberative democracy and the conceptual foundations of electronic government. Government Information Quarterly


22 (4), 702–771
2 Andersen, K. V., 2006 Andersen, K. V., Henriksen, H. Z., 2006. E-government maturity models: Extension of the Layne and Lee model. Government information


quarterly 23 (2), 236–248.
2 Gil-Garcia, 2007 Gil-Garcia, J. R., Martinez-Moyano, I. J., 2007. Understanding the evolution of e-government: The influence of systems of rules on public


sector dynamics. Government Information Quarterly 24 (2), 266–290.
2 Helbig, N., 2009 Helbig, N., Gil-Garc’?a, J. R., Ferro, E., 2009. Understanding the complexity of electronic government: Implications from the digital divide


literature. Government Information Quarterly 26 (1), 89–97.
3 Verdegem,P., 2009 Verdegem,P.,Verleye,G.,2009.User-centred e-government in practice: A comprehensive model for measuring user satisfaction. Government


information quarterly 26 (3), 487–497.
3 Gauld, R., 2010 Gauld, R., Goldfinch, S., Horsburgh, S., 2010. Do they want it? do they use it? the demand-side of e-government in Australia and New


Zealand. Government Information Quarterly 27 (2), 177–186.
3 Reddick, C. G., 2012 Reddick, C. G., Turner, M., 2012. Channel choice and public service delivery in Canada: Comparing e-government to traditional service


delivery. Government Information Quarterly 29 (1), 1–11.
2012Andersen, K. N., Andersen, K. N., Medaglia, R., Henriksen, H. Z., 2012. Social media in public health care: Impact domain propositions. Government


Information Quarterly 29 (4), 462–469.
4 Feroz Khan,G., 2014 Feroz Khan,G., YoungYoon,H.,Kim,J., WooPark,H., 2014. From e-government to social government: Twitter use by Korea's central


government. Online Information Review 38 (1), 95–113.
4 Bons'on, E., 2015 Bons'on, E., Royo, S., Ratkai, M., 2015. Citizens' engagement on local governments' Facebook sites- An empirical analysis: The impact of


different media and content types in Western Europe. Government Information Quarterly 32 (1), 52–62.
4 Porumbescu, G., 2015 Porumbescu, G., 2015. Linking transparency to trust in government and voice. The American Review of Public Administration,


0275074015607301.
4 Porumbescu, G. A., 2016a. Porumbescu, G. A., 2016a. Comparing the effects of e-government and social media use on trust in government: Evidence from Seoul, South


Korea. Public Management Review 18 (9), 1308–1334.
4 Porumbescu, G. A., 2016b. Porumbescu, G. A., 2016b. Placing the effect? gleaning insights into the relationship between citizens' use of e-government and trust in


government. Public Management Review 18 (10), 1504–1535.
4 Nam, T., 2016 Nam, T., 2016. Citizen attitudes about open government and government 2.0: A path analysis. International Journal of Electronic


Government Research (IJEGR) 12 (4), 46–66.
4 Nam, T., 2017 Nam, T., 2017. A tool for liberty or oppression? a cross-national study of the internet's influence on democracy. Telematics and Informatics


34 (5), 538–549.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


391






main path of the major clusters (cf.Figs. 6, 7, 8, 9). Apart from the
trajectory of the evolution, the nodes on the main path also give clues to
the topics of research in each cluster. Table 3 lists the main topics of the
sub-clusters of cluster #1, which we identified from the text corpus of
abstracts by the NLP algorithm in Shibata et al. (2011).


Sub-cluster #6, though relatively small, has the characteristics of an
emerging cluster with high z-scores and small p-values with relatively
recent publications. The topic according to the NLP analysis is
Transformation to open government. According to the criteria in Shibata
et al. (2011)Jaeger P.T, 2010, Gov Inform Q, V27, P371 is the most
promising paper in terms of its impact on future research, with the
highest score of betweenness centrality within the emerging sub-
cluster#6. This article analyses the pros and cons of the implementation
and the objectives to attain in the transition from conventional to ci-
tizen-centric e-government or e-democracy. It also projects the ad-
vantages of the extensive use of e-government services and the need to
include non-governmental social network services to provide better
access to the information and services related to the government for
citizens.


Cluster #2 contains 31.03% of the articles. The central theme of
cluster#2 is quality surveys on user adoption and evaluating customer
satisfaction. However, the topics of the articles vary from legislative
policy development to improve e-services quality to surveys on user
adoption and satisfaction. The first subtopic of discussion is related to
legislative policies to improve e-services in general and to individuals
with disabilities in particular. The second channel of discussion in this
cluster is on models to assess user adoption and customer satisfaction.
The articles in this cluster also discuss user acceptance and diffusion,
citizen demand, and e-governance implementation. The third topic is
on policy-making and methods to bridge the digital divide in society.


The main topic of cluster #3, which contains 2018 nodes (14.18%),
is technology adoption and process-re-engineering. The main focus is
accessibility and the credibility of the services based on new technol-
ogies. The detailed discussions include the adoption of the strategic
changes incorporated in e-governance using new methods, gadgets, and
the technology introduced by ICT in e-governance. These technological
interventions demand process re-engineering to address various issues
on policy formulation, design, and implementation. Some articles in
this cluster discuss legislative support and provisions to provide dis-
abled persons with internet access.


Fig. 4. Roadmap of e-governance research activities.


Fig. 5. The clusters: Cluster #1 - red (41.56%) Cluster #2 - green (31.03%)
cluster #3 -Blue (14.18%) Cluster #4 - Pink (3.33%). (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


392






Cluster #4 is relatively smaller, containing 3.33% of the total arti-
cles. This cluster is largely based on e-commerce and e-procurement
related to government organizations. The topics include e-procurement,
digital supply chain management, e-markets, and factors affecting e-
business.


The first cluster is relatively larger, with various sub-domains. The
main path of the cluster provides insight into the evolution of e-gov-
ernment and discusses topics on trustworthiness and user adoption re-
lated to open government. Hence, the cluster could be called the future
trends cluster. The topic in the second cluster is assessment of quality
efficiency and user satisfaction etc., and hence we can call it the quality
assessment cluster. The third cluster discusses user adoption of new
technologies and re-engineering existing processes for better adoption,
and hence, we can call it the adoption cluster. We designate the fourth
cluster as the e-commerce cluster as the main topic of discussion is e-
commerce related to government transactions and procurement.


The first block spanning 1990–2000 in the roadmap in Fig. 4 is on
transforming the government administrative system to the digital
platform based on transition models to integrate document digitisation.
A major part of cluster #1 is related to this block. As it is the largest
cluster, the sub-clusters spread across later blocks. The second block


during 2000–2010 is mainly on constructing implementation models
and assessing and evaluating the implemented systems. Cluster #2 on
assessment, cluster #3 on user adoption, and cluster #4 on e-procure-
ment mainly belong to this block. The fourth block starting from 2016 is
characterised by the introduction of Web 3.0 to extract social opinions
from discussions on social media by the semantics of the web, big data
analytics, machine learning, and so on. The block is characterised by
open data and e-participation, which is the focus of some sub-clusters of
cluster#1. The coherence of the cluster themes with the roadmap of e-
governance implementation suggests that the development in e-gov-
ernance closely follows the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)
(Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989) and its extension, the unified theory
of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) model (Venkatesh,
Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003).


The analysis based on quantitative measures may not always be as
objective as that of an expert opinion. We thus conducted a cross-
analysis of the emerging topics with the result of main path analysis.
The research papers at the leaf nodes of the main path are on open data,
social network, Web 2.0 applications, and participatory governance. The
results of the main path analysis are coherent with the results of the
cluster analysis, confirming the accuracy of the method adopted within
the constrained environment of our study.


3.4. The Symbiosis maturity model of e-governance implementation


As discussed earlier, the chronological evolution of discussion topics
extracted from the content analysis of the articles in the main path
(c.f.Fig. 3) was depicted in Fig. 4. We see that the evolution of these
topics closely relates to the advancement of Web technology. Hence, we
propose a conceptual model of the maturity of e-governance im-
plementation based on the development of Web technology. The model
is visualized in Fig. 10. The first phase of e-governance during 1989 to
2005 in the main path in Fig. 3 is marked by the adoption of digital
technologies for public administration. The introduction and wide ap-
plication of electronic gadgets, including computers, fax machines,
printers, scanners, and so on at the grass-roots level of government
administration promoted the implementation of e-governance. Web 1.0
technology, which includes the web of documents during 1989 to 2005
helped the transfer of documents to the internet. This period is the first
phase of the evolution of e-governance that give information promi-
nence. The second phase of evolution of e-governance starting from
2004, which involves two-way interactions between the government
and citizens, and interactions within society, was fostered by Web 2.0,
known as theWeb of people, which was capable of connecting billions of
people. Web 2.0 technology was the basis of crowds forming on social
networks including YouTube, Flicker, Blogs, LinkedIn, Facebook, my-
Space, and so on. In the second phase, governments utilised Web 2.0 as
a media for communicating effectively with a large group of citizens
and to obtain their feedback. The introduction of digital online financial
transactions and plastic money also played an essential role in this
phase. We can represent the characteristics of this phase as stage 2 of
Interaction and stage 3 of Transaction in the maturity model in Fig. 10.
The third phase in the main path, from 2009 to 2012, which was also
promoted by Web 3.0 technology, is known as the Web of data. It could
group even more people, leading to the possibility of semantic web
identification of major topics of discussion, social opinion gathering,


Table 2
Key words related to the major clusters.


Clusters Size% Key words


#1 41.56 Models, e-participation, social media, trust worthiness, local government, open data, web2.0, Transparency, Digital repository
#2 31.03 e-Government services, Information technology acceptance, User adoption, Digital divide, Public management, Inclusion policies, IT strategies
#3 14.18 Accessibility, Municipal websites, Usability, Web credibility, Mobile readiness
#4 3.33 Electronic commerce, Electronic procurement, Military organization procurement, Web-based architecture, Digital government


Table 3
Topics related to the sub-clusters of cluster #1.


Sub-cluster Size % Key words


#1 18.58 Evaluation Models on trust worthiness, user adoption
#2 15.09 Customer satisfaction Models
#3 12.59 Open government
#4 7.05 Open government, e-participation
#5 5.64 Maturity Models, Research reviews
#6 5.16 Transformation to open government
#7 4.40 Policy, strategic decisions, framework creation


Fig. 6. Main path of Sub-cluster #1.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


393






and analysis of data using artificial intelligence. This stage initiated the
transformation of the e-government to the participatory government,
with citizen involvement in decision making. So the core feature of this
stage is Transformation. Web 3.0 also contributes to the fourth phase of
e-governance, in which e-participation, e-democracy, and open data are
the trends. The upcoming technology Web 4.0, the extension of Web
3.0, could push e-governance to an even higher level. Web 4.0 tech-
nology is known as the web of symbiosis, or the intelligent interactive
electronic agent. The computing techniques of artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and personal identification using cameras and other
connected devices tagged with RFID chips can enhance communication
through web channels and provide a more personalised response. The
adoption of Web 4.0 technologies utilising more flexible data types into
e-government services may be the focus of research in the next phase.
Web 4.0 technology offers prospects for the next stage of e-governance
characterised by intelligent interaction with users, resulting in the stage
of symbiosis. With the support of Web 4.0 technology, the e-governance


system will be able to interact with users with the features of an in-
telligent human being who can identify persons by capturing biometric
information. The e-governance system will also be able to understand
the user requirements by using artificial intelligence and machine
learning techniques to analyse the historical records of the user activ-
ities in the system. In short, the e-governance maturity model can be
conceptualized with five stages of maturity. The first four stages agree
with the Gartner group maturity model proposed by Baum and Di Maio
(2000). The fifth stage of symbiosis is expected to evolve with the
support of Web 4.0 technology, machine learning, cloud computing,
and RFID tagged devices.


4. Summary


The emergence of e-governance has contributed significantly to the
effectiveness, precision, and transparency of public administration in
addition to the extensive outreach of government services. As the first
step, we fitted a growth curve to the number of research articles pub-
lished per year, and the result shows that research activities in e-gov-
ernance are still in the emerging stage and have not reached maturity.
We analysed the citation network of research articles on e-governance
to investigate the evolution of topics and unfolding research trends. The
main global path of the citation network portrays the emerging course
of research in the e-governance literature and the associated paradigm
shifts in research trends. It reveals the change in the priority of research
topics over time and uncovers the persistence of rapid changes in the
maturity levels of e-government from the global perspective.


The papers in the main path showed four phases: the first phase
until 2005 focuses on information systems and implementation models;
the second phase between 2005 and 2009 focuses on evaluation
models; the third phase from 2009 to 2012 focuses on social networking
and multichannel communication; and the fourth from 2012 onwards
focuses on e-democracy, open data, and e-participation. The first phase
was characterised by the transformation from manual to digital systems
by the introduction of personal computers, printers, and e-mail and
SMS technology to support e-governance. Several maturity models for
e-governance implementation evolved during this period. The second
phase is boosted by the widespread adoption of the internet, Web 2.0
technology, and facilities for online money transactions. Researchers
concentrated on evaluating services, including user adoption, user sa-
tisfaction, the quality and efficiency of services, and so on. During the
third phase, e-services were extensively provided through websites and
the use of e-mail and SMS increased considerably. The reduction in the
cost of electronic accessories associated with e-governance and in using
the internet accelerated the third stage developments, which featured
the multichannel delivery of e-services. The introduction of smart-
phones and Web 2.0+ technology promoted user adoption and e-par-
ticipation in the fourth phase. This phase represents the level of
seamless interaction with customers, as many maturity models specify.
The result of the main path analysis shows that e-democracy, partici-
patory governance, and open data are the future trends. The future
trend is the extensive use of social media for seamless interaction with
customers and to empower citizens. E-voting, candidates' e-campaigns,
e-supported emergency management, citizen participatory governance,
and open data are no longer a dream for developing and under-devel-
oped countries.


The cluster analysis revealed four main clusters. The analysis
identified the major domains of research in e-governance as information
and administrative system modelling; quality surveys and evaluations of user
adoption and customer satisfaction; the possibility of process re-engineering;
and open data and the role of social networking and e-deliberation leading to
participative government. We corroborated the resulting cluster analysis
with the main path. Utilising two topological measures, z-score and the
participation coefficient, the study also reveals the emerging research
fronts and predicts potential core studies. Most of the reviews in this
field are restricted to a limited focal theme, data sets, time spans, or


Fig. 7. Main path of Sub-cluster #2.


Fig. 8. Main path of Sub-cluster #3.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


394






geographic locations as they adopted conventional methods. The al-
gorithmic approach employed in this study is more appropriate for the
field of e-governance, which characterised by a vast corpus of literature
with diverse research trends, to elucidate the underlying patterns. The
dynamics of the research activities in e-governance the results of this
analysis indicate enables subsequent researchers to set their priority,
academician to frame curricula for literacy on emerging domains, ad-
ministrators to adopt policies and legal frameworks, and manufacturers
to develop low-cost solutions for technological requirements.


5. Discussion


The main purpose of the study is to trace the development of e-
governance and the emerging research fronts in the literature on the
domain using CNA. The first phase up to 2005 is characterised by
methods and maturity models to transform the conventional govern-
ance to e-governance (Doty & Erdelez, 2002; Ho & Coates, 2002; Layne
& Lee, 2001; McNeal et al., 2003; Reddick, 2004; Warkentin, Gefen,


Pavlou, & Rose, 2002; Zafiropoulos, Karavasilis, & Vrana, 2012).
After the implementation of an e-governance system, proper eva-


luation and follow-up are necessary for its success. Collecting feedback
and adopting the necessary re-engineering process could lead to higher
success rates. The second phase (from 2005 to 2009) saw radical de-
velopment in the research on the evaluation of existing e-governance
systems and several researchers observed that customer-oriented web
services were boosted by internet adoption at the grass-roots level (Lee,
Tan, & Trimi, 2005). Several performance models to improve the per-
ceived ease of use of websites and to increase customer satisfaction
were also developed during this phase. Thus, the second phase wit-
nessed advancements in research in divergent bi-directional paths in
models on the implementation of e-governance in continuation of the first
phase of research and the evaluation models on topics related to service
quality, customer satisfaction, and user adoption. E-governance projects
will be successful if there is an exotic use of e-services by customers and
high user adoption and satisfaction. The major factors that determine
the promotion of user access to e-services are the willingness and
mindsets of the stakeholders to adopt the behavioural changes brought
about by e-governance. The issues related to privacy, lack of trust, se-
curity, and socio-cultural practices are the main factors limiting the
usage of e-governance services, leading to the failure of many e-gov-
ernance systems. Verdegem and Verleye (2009) argued that improved
online access is the primary requirement for attracting potential users
and increasing efficiency. Transparent, accountable, and accessible e-
services would attract users and overcome the restrictions of money and
time. Therefore, evaluating the system and close monitoring should be
ensured at all stages of development for better transparency, effec-
tiveness, and sustainability. In the transition stage of e-governance,
user-centric models of customer satisfaction and user adoption, and
models of process re-engineering were the major topics of discussion.


The next stage of e-governance research (2009–2012) flourished
with the introduction of Web 2.0+ technology, which promoted the use
of social networking to ensure public participation, leading to e-de-
mocracy or participative governance. Many authors noted the im-
portance of social media and social networking, which enhance partici-
patory governance.


The current phase of research in e-governance after 2012 is mainly
on e-democracy, participatory governance, and open data. The


Fig. 9. Main path of Sub-cluster #4.


Fig. 10. Extension of the maturity development model.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


395






alternative channels for accessing e-services are better options to impart
transparency, openness, accountability, and to increase citizen participation
in governments' decision-making processes (de Jager & van Reijswoud,
2008; Sivarajah et al., 2015). The convenience to cast online votes,
provision to participate in the government's strategic decision-making
process through social networks, the dissemination of government in-
formation, collection of public opinions on social issues at a tremendous
speed, possibility to trace significant topics of discussion in social net-
work groups, and so on are the remarkable advantages of social net-
working in e-governance based on Web 2.0+ technology.


The analysis revealed that governance advanced from conventional
government services to citizen-oriented e-services by including the di-
rect participation of citizens in the decision-making process of gov-
ernment, leading to e-democracy or participative governance. In a parti-
cipatory government, people often interact with the government in the
policy-making and problem-solving processes. A UN survey identified
three major activities associated with decision making through e-par-
ticipation viz., e-information sharing, e-consultation, and e-decision-
making (UN-Report 2005). Sharing government-related information
and data through open data platforms makes the government process
more transparent, increases citizens' trust in the government and im-
proves e-participation for better decision-making. The main topics of
discussion in recent years are open data, participatory governance/e-de-
mocracy, social networking, alternative channels for communication, and
Web.2.0+ as the platform for the seamless social interaction with the gov-
ernment. Fig. 1 illustrates the roadmap of research streams in e-gov-
ernance. Information on the future trends of e-governance is of high
interest to a broad community of researchers, administrators, investors,
and other stakeholders of e-government. Governments can take stra-
tegic decisions by considering the emerging trends of e-democracy and
social media adoption in e-governance as the main path and cluster
analysis revealed. The adoption of Web 4.0 technology in the next stage
of e-governance is expected to bring in radical changes in the G2C in-
teraction channels. This scenario could also provide opportunities for
manufacturers to incorporate more features related to convenience into
the technical devices used for interaction. For example, by replacing
touch screens with more reliable and accurate voice input options in
natural language. Social media and the diffusion of smart-phones con-
tributed significantly to citizen engagement in this stage. Open data,
one area of focus on the leaf nodes of the main path, is an emerging
feature of e-governance that requires high-end techniques and


electronic devices to store and process data. The issues related to cloud
computing techniques and device design to store and process big data
would also attract attention among researchers. Security and privacy
are the other major risk factors in the era of the big data. In this sce-
nario, blockchain technology is gaining increased attention and it could
be incorporated into e-government-related data storage and transaction
processes to enhance protection, privacy, and security.


5.1. Contributions and implications


This study traces the main pathways, as the backbone of develop-
ment, of e-governance. We identified the sub-domains of the areas using
cluster analysis and indicated their chronological positions in the main
path of the overall development. The growth curve fitted to the number
of articles shows that there is still much to be done to reach maturity,
indicating scope for further research activities. We have also identified
articles in the emerging clusters with promising future impacts using
network parameters. The themes considered in the article could be
indicators of the direction of research in the near future. The results of
the analysis in this study could help to set the focus of further research,
the selection of suitable models and methodologies for administrators,
and the development of technologies for manufacturers, in addition to
clarifying the current research and future trends. The systematic, al-
gorithmic approach based on SNA tools in this work provides a more
objective and impartial view of the evolution of the area, emerging
scenarios, and future trends.


5.1.1. Determinants of G2C interactions
The content analysis of the articles of the leaf nodes of the main path


in Fig. 3 reveals that e-governance is moving towards citizen-oriented
governance by soliciting extensive e-participation in the decision-
making process of the government. The implementation of the latest
trends in e-services needs seamless interaction between the citizen and
the e-government. Hence, the quality of G2C interaction must be en-
hanced to improve citizens' participation in the decision-making pro-
cess. It is useful to examine the related factors. Table 4 lists the major
determinants associated with the components of G2C interactions ex-
tracted from the corpus of articles.


The major determinants associated with the government are poli-
tical policy, system support, system quality factors, and strategic plans
(Davis et al., 1989; Hien, 2014; Irani et al., 2012; Janssen & Wahyudi,


Table 4
Key determinants related to the entities in G2C interaction.


( )


E-Government Interaction Citizen


1 Political factors
Political Policy
Leadership


2 System support
Infrastructure
Employees


3 System quality factors
Transparency
Authenticity
Responsiveness
Openness
Economic feasibility


4 Strategic, monitoring and evaluation plans for the sustainability of e-governance


1 Service quality factors
Ease of use
Availability
Personalization


2 Information quality factors
Accuracy
Usability
Currency


3 Risk factors
Privacy
Security


4 Technological innovations
Grass-root level implementation
Adoption by users


1 Socio-cultural Practices
Collectivism
Uncertainty avoidance
Power distance


2 Motivations to use
Purpose
Trust
Awareness


3 Digital divide
Age
Gender
e-literacy
Physical impairment
Poverty
Cultural background


4 Other factors
Training obtained
Previous experience
Customer satisfaction


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


396






2017; Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Malhotra, 2005; West, 2004). The
policy of the government and its leadership are the major factors as-
sociated with the political factors in the implementation stage. Human
capital, especially the skill and experience of the employees and in-
frastructure, are factors related to the system support. The quality of the
system is promoted by transparency, authenticity, responsiveness,
openness, and economic feasibility (Alalwan, Dwivedi, & Rana, 2017;
Carter & Bélanger, 2005; Dwivedi et al., 2017; Nam, 2016;
Papadomichelaki & Mentzas, 2009; Parasuraman et al., 2005; Sivarajah
et al., 2015). The strategic plans, anticipation of future requirements,
evaluation of plans, and monitoring implementation to detect draw-
backs early contribute significantly to a successful e-governance im-
plementation.


The major determinants related to the citizen are socio-cultural
practices, motivation to use, the digital divide, and various other fac-
tors. Collectivism, avoidance of uncertainty, and power distance are
prominent socio-cultural factors (Buchenrieder, Dufhues, Theesfeld, &
Nuchanata, 2017). The purpose and trust in e-government are the
motivating factors for participation (Al-Hujran, Al-Debei, Chatfield, &
Migdadi, 2015; Alzahrani, Al-Karaghouli, & Weerakkody, 2017; Chen
et al., 2015; Hien, 2014; Hung, Chang, & Yu, 2006; Parasuraman et al.,
2005; Pavlou & Fygenson, 2006; Weerakkody et al., 2013). The digital
divide arises from age, gender, literacy level, poverty, ethnicity, and
cultural practice, major factors that play important roles in e-govern-
ance interactions (Helbig et al., 2009; Venkatesh et al., 2003). The
other factors promoting interaction are the customer satisfaction with
the previous experiences and the training and customer support pro-
vided to the user to use the services of the system effectively
(Thompson, Higgins, & Howell, 1991; Venkatesh et al., 2003).


The major determinants related to the technological medium of G2C
interaction are service quality factors, information quality factors, risk
factors, and technological innovations. The service quality factors in-
clude the availability, ease of use, and the degree of personalization
provided by the websites by storing the customer's details (Davis, 1989;
Venkatesh et al., 2003). Some of the major risk factors are related to the
privacy and security of personal information and financial transactions.
The major factors related to information quality are accuracy, usability,
and currency (Davis, 1989; Davis et al., 1989).


6. Conclusion


E-governance is a unique, pervasive, and revolutionary term that
represents transparent, accountable, efficient, and customer-oriented
government administration with the back-end support of ICT. The re-
search domains in the field are enriched by the diversity and rapid
evolution of the related fields. In this study, we systematically in-
vestigated the dynamics of the evolution of e-governance, including the
evolution, paradigm shifts, diversity of research topics, and emerging
research fronts by applying SNA tools to the citation network of e-
governance. We visualized the main path of the evolution, which shows
four distinct phases. The cluster analysis of the citation network iden-
tified the major sub-domains portraying the knowledge structure in the
area. The analysis also reveals the emerging research fronts and existing
research work that can have future impacts based on the network
parameters. The study also revealed that the upcoming technology of
Web 4.0 is expected to have a crucial role in steering the direction of the
future development of e-governance.


Acknowledgements


The authors are grateful to Prof. V. Ajaya Kumar for useful discus-
sions and campus computing facility of the University of Kerala set up
under DST-PURSE programme for providing computational facilities.
Authors are also indebted to the referees for their constructive com-
ments and useful suggestions which helped them to improve the ori-
ginal manuscript substantially.


References


Alalwan, A. A., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Rana, N. P. (2017). Factors influencing adoption of
mobile banking by jordanian bank customers: Extending utaut2 with trust.
International Journal of Information Management, 37(3), 99–110.


Al-Hujran, O., Al-Debei, M. M., Chatfield, A., & Migdadi, M. (2015). The imperative of
influencing citizen attitude toward e-government adoption and use. Computers in
Human Behavior, 53, 189–203.


Alzahrani, L., Al-Karaghouli, W., & Weerakkody, V. (2017). Analysing the critical factors
influencing trust in e-government adoption from citizens' perspective: A systematic
review and a conceptual framework. International Business Review, 26(1), 164–175.


Andersen, K. V., & Henriksen, H. Z. (2006). E-government maturity models: Extension of
the layne and lee model. Government Information Quarterly, 23(2), 236–248.


Andersen, K. N., Medaglia, R., & Henriksen, H. Z. (2012). Social media in public health
care: Impact domain propositions. Government Information Quarterly, 29(4), 462–469.


Backus, M., 2001. E-governance and developing countries–introduction and examples.
Research report no. 3. International Institute for Communication and Development.
Retrieved May 20, 2011.


Bannister, F., & Connolly, R. (2011). New problems for old defining e-governance. System
sciences (HICSS), 2011 44th Hawaii international conference on. IEEE (pp. 1–10). .


Bannister, F., & Connolly, R. (2012). Forward to the past: Lessons for the future of e-
government from the story so far. Information Polity, 17(3–4), 211–226.


Bannister, F., & Grönlund, Å. (2017). Information technology and government research: A
brief history. Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on Ssystem
Ssciences.


Barabási, A.-L., Albert, R., & Jeong, H. (2000). Scale-free characteristics of random net-
works: The topology of the world-wide web. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 281(1–4), 69–77.


Barabási, A.-L., Gulbahce, N., & Loscalzo, J. (2011). Network medicine: A network-based
approach to human disease. Nature Reviews Genetics, 12(1), 56.


Batagelj, V. (2003). Efficient algorithms for citation network analysis. arXiv preprint cs/
0309023.


Batagelj, V., & Mrvar, A. (1998). Pajek-program for large network analysis. Connections,
21(2), 47–57.


Baum, C., & Di Maio, A. (2000). Gartner's four phases of e-government model. Gartner
Group, 12.


Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., & Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of
communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
Experiment, 2008(10), P10008.


Bolvar, M. P. R., Muñoz, L. A., & Hernández, A. M. L. (2010). Trends of e-government
research. Contextualization and research opportunities. The International Journal of
Digital Accounting Research, 10, 87–111.


Bonsón, E., Royo, S., & Ratkai, M. (2015). Citizens' engagement on local governments'
facebook sites. An empirical analysis: The impact of different media and content
types in Western Europe. Government Information Quarterly, 32(1), 52–62.


Buchenrieder, G., Dufhues, T., Theesfeld, I., & Nuchanata, M. (2017). Participatory local
governance and cultural practices in Thailand. Cogent Social Sciences, 3(1), 1338331.


Carter, L., & Bélanger, F. (2005). The utilization of e-government services: Citizen trust,
innovation and acceptance factors. Information Systems Journal, 15(1), 5–25.


Chadwick, A. (2003). Bringing e-democracy back in: Why it matters for future research on
e-governance. Social Science Computer Review, 21(4), 443–455.


Chen, Y.-C., & Gant, J. (2001). Transforming e-government services: The use of application
service providers in US local governments. AMCIS 2001 Proceedings. 308.


Chen, J. V., Jubilado, R. J. M., Capistrano, E. P. S., & Yen, D. C. (2015). Factors affecting
online tax filing–an application of the is success model and trust theory. Computers in
Human Behavior, 43, 251–262.


Colizza, V., Barrat, A., Barthélemy, M., & Vespignani, A. (2006). The role of the airline
transportation network in the prediction and predictability of global epidemics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(7),
2015–2020.


Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. MIS Quarterly, 319–340.


Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer
technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8),
982–1003.


Dawes, S. S. (2008). The evolution and continuing challenges of e-governance. Public
Administration Review, 68(s1).


Doty, P., & Erdelez, S. (2002). Information micro-practices in Texas rural courts: Methods
and issues for e-government. Government Information Quarterly, 19(4), 369–387.


Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Janssen, M., Lal, B., Williams, M. D., & Clement, M. (2017).
An empirical validation of a unified model of electronic government adoption
(umega). Government Information Quarterly, 34(2), 211–230.


Ebel, H., Mielsch, L.-I., & Bornholdt, S. (2002). Scale-free topology of e-mail networks.
Physical Review E, 66(3), 035103.


Erman, N. (2009). Citation analysis for e-government research. In: Proceedings of the 10th
annual international conference on digital government research: Social networks: Making
connections between citizens, data and government. Digital government Society of North
America (pp. 244–253). .


Erman, N., & Todorovski, L. (2010). Analyzing the structure of the egov conference
community. In: International conference on electronic government. Springer (pp. 73–
84). .


Feroz Khan, G., Young Yoon, H., Kim, J., & Woo Park, H. (2014). From e-government to
social government: Twitter use by Korea's central government. Online Information
Review, 38(1), 95–113.


Garfield, E., Sher, I. H., & Torpie, R. J. (1964). The use of citation data in writing the history


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


397



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0160




of science. Tech. Rep., institute for scientific information in Philadelphia.
Gauld, R., Goldfinch, S., & Horsburgh, S. (2010). Do they want it do they use it the


‘emand-side'of e-government in Australia and New Zealand. Government Information
Quarterly, 27(2), 177–186.


Grant, G., & Chau, D. (2006). Developing a generic framework for e-government.
Advanced Topics in Information Management, 5(1), 72–94.


Grönlund, Å., & Horan, T. A. (2005). Introducing e-gov: History, definitions, and issues.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 15(1), 39.


Guimerá, R., & Amaral, L. A. N. (2005). Functional cartography of complex metabolic
networks. Nature, 433(7028), 895–900.


Heeks, R. (1999). Reinventing government in the information age: International practice in IT-
enabled public sector reform. Vol. 1. Psychology Press.


Helbig, N., Gil-Garca, J. R., & Ferro, E. (2009). Understanding the complexity of elec-
tronic government: Implications from the digital divide literature. Government
Information Quarterly, 26(1), 89–97.


Hien, N. M. (2014). A study on evaluation of e-government service quality. International
Journal of Social, Management, Economics and Business Engineering, 8(1), 16–19.


Ho, A. T.-K., & Coates, P. (2002). Citizen participation: Legitimizing performance mea-
surement as a decision tool. Government Finance Review, 18(2), 8–11.


Holmes, D. (2001). eGov: eBusiness strategies for government. Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Hummon, N. P., & Carley, K. (1993). Social networks as normal science. Social Networks,


15(1), 71–106.
Hummon, N. P., & Dereian, P. (1989). Connectivity in a citation network: The develop-


ment of dna theory. Social Networks, 11(1), 39–63.
Hummon, N. P., Doreian, P., & Freeman, L. C. (1990). Analyzing the structure of the


centrality-productivity literature created between 1948 and 1979. Knowledge, 11(4),
459–480.


Hung, S.-Y., Chang, C.-M., & Yu, T.-J. (2006). Determinants of user acceptance of the e-
government services: The case of online tax filing and payment system. Government
Information Quarterly, 23(1), 97–122.


Irani, Z., Lee, H., Weerakkody, V., Kamal, M., Topham, S., Simpson, G., Balci, A., Meden,
T. D., Gábor, A., Corvinus, A. K., et al. (2012). Ubiquitous participation platform for
policy makings (ubipol). Technology enabled transformation of the public sector: Advances
in E-government: Advances in E-government. 79.


Irani, Z., Love, P. E., & Montazemi, A. (2007). E-government: Past, present and future.
European Journal of Information Systems, 16(2), 103–105.


de Jager, A., & van Reijswoud, V. (2008). E-governance in the developing world in action.
The Journal of Community Informatics, 4(2).


Janssen, M., & Wahyudi, A. (2017). Factors influencing big data decision-making quality.
Journal of Business Research, 70.


Joseph, R. C. (2013). A structured analysis of e-government studies: Trends and oppor-
tunities. Government Information Quarterly, 30(4), 435–440.


Kajikawa, Y., & Takeda, Y. (2009). Citation network analysis of organic leds. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 76(8), 1115–1123.


Kaylor, C., Deshazo, R., & Van Eck, D. (2002). E-government: A report on implementing
services among american cities. Government Information Quarterly, 18(4), 293–307.


Kim, J. (2008). A model and case for supporting participatory public decision making in
e-democracy. Group Decision and Negotiation, 17(3), 179–193.


Layne, K., & Lee, J. (2001). Developing fully functional e-government: A four stage model.
Government Information Quarterly, 18(2), 122–136.


Lee, S. M., Tan, X., & Trimi, S. (2005). Current practices of leading e-government coun-
tries. Communications of the ACM, 48(10), 99–104.


Linders, D. (2012). From e-government to we-government: Defining a typology for citizen
coproduction in the age of social media. Government Information Quarterly, 29(4),
446–454.


Liu, J. S., Chen, H.-H., Ho, M. H.-C., & Li, Y.-C. (2014). Citations with different levels of
relevancy: Tracing the main paths of legal opinions. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology, 65(12), 2479–2488.


Liu, J. S., & Lu, L. Y. (2012). An integrated approach for main path analysis: Development
of the hirsch index as an example. Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, 63(3), 528–542.


Macintosh, A. (2004). Characterizing e-participation in policy-making. In: System sci-
ences, 2004. Proceedings of the 37th annual Hawaii international conference on. IEEE
(pp. 10). .


Marche, S., & McNiven, J. D. (2003). E-government and e-governance: The future isn't
what it used to be. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences/Revue Canadienne des
Sciences de l'Administration, 20(1), 74–86.


McNeal, R. S., Tolbert, C. J., Mossberger, K., & Dotterweich, L. J. (2003). Innovating in
digital government in the american states. Social Science Quarterly, 84(1), 52–70.


Medaglia, R., & Zheng, L. (2017). Mapping government social media research and moving
it forward: A framework and a research agenda. Government Information Quarterly,
34(3), 496–510.


Meijer, A., & Bekkers, V. (2015). A metatheory of e-government: Creating some order in a
fragmented research field. Government Information Quarterly, 32(3), 237–245.


Moon, M. J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or
reality. Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424–433.


Moon, M. J., & Norris, D. F. (2005). Does managerial orientation matter the adoption of
reinventing government and e-government at the municipal level. Information Systems
Journal, 15(1), 43–60.


Nam, T. (2016). Citizen attitudes about open government and government 2.0: A path
analysis. International Journal of Electronic Government Research (IJEGR), 12(4),
46–66.


Nam, T. (2017). A tool for liberty or oppression a cross-national study of the internet's
influence on democracy. Telematics and Informatics, 34(5), 538–549.


Nations, U. (2005). UN global E-government readiness report. (United Nations).
Nations, U. (2014). United nations e-government survey 2014: E-government for the future we


want. (United Nations Department of economic and social affairs).
Newman, M. E. (2004). Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks.


Physical Review E, 69(6), 066133.
Newman, M. E., & Girvan, M. (2004). Finding and evaluating community structure in


networks. Physical Review E, 69(2), 026113.
Okot-Uma, R. W., & London, C. S. (2000). Electronic governance: Re-inventing good gov-


ernance. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Otte, E., & Rousseau, R. (2002). Social network analysis: A powerful strategy, also for the


information sciences. Journal of Information Science, 28(6), 441–453.
Palvia, S. C. J., & Sharma, S. S. (2007). E-government and e-governance: Definitions/


domain framework and status around the world. International Conference on E-gov-
ernance (pp. 1–12). .


Papadomichelaki, X., & Mentzas, G. (2009). A multiple-item scale for assessing e-gov-
ernment service quality. International conference on electronic government. Springer (pp.
163–175). .


Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V. A., & Malhotra, A. (2005). Es-qual: A multiple-item scale
for assessing electronic service quality. Journal of Service Research, 7(3), 213–233.


Pavlou, P. A., & Fygenson, M. (2006). Understanding and predicting electronic commerce
adoption: An extension of the theory of planned behavior. MIS Quarterly, 115–143.


Peña-López, I., et al., 2016. Un e-government survey 2016. E-government in support of
sustainable development. Tech. Rep., UNPAN. URL http://workspace.unpan.
org/sites/internet/documents/UNPAN96407.Pdf.


Porumbescu, G. (2017). Linking transparency to trust in government and voice. The
American Review of Public Administration, 47(5), 520–537.


Porumbescu, G. A. (2016a). Comparing the effects of e-government and social media use
on trust in government: Evidence from Seoul, South Korea. Public Management Review,
18(9), 1308–1334.


Porumbescu, G. A. (2016b). Placing the effect gleaning insights into the relationship
between citizens' use of e-government and trust in government. Public Management
Review, 18(10), 1504–1535.


Power, J. D., Schlaggar, B. L., Lessov-Schlaggar, C. N., & Petersen, S. E. (2013). Evidence
for hubs in human functional brain networks. Neuron, 79(4), 798–813.


Rana, N. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., Williams, M. D., & Weerakkody, V. (2016). Adoption of online
public grievance redressal system in India: Toward developing a unified view.
Computers in Human Behavior, 59, 265–282.


Reddick, C. G. (2004). A two-stage model of e-government growth: Theories and em-
pirical evidence for US cities. Government Information Quarterly, 21(1), 51–64.


Reddick, C. G. (2005). Citizen interaction with e-government: From the streets to servers.
Government Information Quarterly, 22(1), 38–57.


Reddick, C. G., & Turner, M. (2012). Channel choice and public service delivery in
Canada: Comparing e-government to traditional service delivery. Government
Information Quarterly, 29(1), 1–11.


van Reijswoud, V., & de Jager, A. (2007). E-governance in the developing world in action:
The case of districtnet in Uganda. World Hospitals and Health Services, 43(1), 32.


Rodríguez Bolvíar, M. P., Alcaide Muñoz, L., & López Hernández, A. M. (2016).
Scientometric study of the progress and development of e-government research
during the period 2000–2012. Information Technology for Development, 22(1), 36–74.


Rodríguez-Bolvíar, M. P., Alcaide-Muñoz, L., & Cobo, M. J. (2018). Analyzing the sci-
entific evolution and impact of e-participation research in jcr journals using science
mapping. International Journal of Information Management, 40, 111–119.


Royo, S., & Yetano, A. (2015). “Crowdsourcing” as a tool for e-participation: Two ex-
periences regarding CO2 emissions at municipal level. Electronic Commerce Research,
15(3), 323–348.


Sæbø, Ø., Rose, J., & Flak, L. S. (2008). The shape of eparticipation: Characterizing an
emerging research area. Government Information Quarterly, 25(3), 400–428.


Saip, M., Kamala, M. A., & Tassabehji, R. (2016). Understanding the corpus of e-government
research: An analysis of the literature using co-citation analysis and social network ana-
lysis.


Sankar, C. P., Asokan, K., & Kumar, K. S. (2015). Exploratory social network analysis of
affiliation networks of indian listed companies. Social Networks, 43, 113–120.


Savolainen, R. (2016). Approaches to socio-cultural barriers to information seeking.
Library & Information Science Research, 38(1), 52–59.


Scholl, H. J. J. (2009). Profiling the eg research community and its core. International
conference on electronic government. Springer (pp. 1–12). .


Scholl, H. J. (2014). The egov research community: An update on where we stand. In:
International conference on electronic government. Springer (pp. 1–16). .


Seng, W. M., Jackson, S., & Philip, G. (2010). Cultural issues in developing e-government
in Malaysia. Behaviour & Information Technology, 29(4), 423–432.


Shibata, N., Kajikawa, Y., & Matsushima, K. (2007). Topological analysis of citation
networks to discover the future core articles. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 58(6), 872–882.


Shibata, N., Kajikawa, Y., Takeda, Y., Sakata, I., & Matsushima, K. (2011). Detecting
emerging research fronts in regenerative medicine by the citation network analysis of
scientific publications. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 78(2), 274–282.


Sivarajah, U., Irani, Z., & Weerakkody, V. (2015). Evaluating the use and impact of web
2.0 technologies in local government. Government Information Quarterly, 32(4),
473–487.


Smith, S., & Dalakiouridou, E. (2009). Contextualising public (e) participation in the
governance of the European Union. European Journal of ePractice, 7(11), 47–50.


Stowers, G. N. (1999). Becoming cyberactive: State and local governments on the world
wide web. Government Information Quarterly, 16(2), 111–127.


Susha, I., Zuiderwijk, A., Janssen, M., & Grönlund, Å. (2015). Benchmarks for evaluating
the progress of open data adoption: Usage, limitations, and lessons learned. Social
Science Computer Review, 33(5), 613–630.


Thomas, J. C., & Streib, G. (2003). The new face of government: Citizen-initiated contacts
in the era of e-government. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory,


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


398



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0385

http://workspace.unpan.org

http://workspace.unpan.org

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0515




13(1), 83–102.
Thompson, R. L., Higgins, C. A., & Howell, J. M. (1991). Personal computing: Toward a


conceptual model of utilization. MIS Quarterly, 125–143.
Vázquez, A., Flammini, A., Maritan, A., & Vespignani, A. (2003). Modeling of protein


interaction networks. Complexus, 1(1), 38–44.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of


information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 425–478.
Verdegem, P., & Verleye, G. (2009). User-centered e-government in practice: A compre-


hensive model for measuring user satisfaction. Government Information Quarterly,
26(3), 487–497.


Wang, P., González, M. C., Hidalgo, C. A., & Barabási, A.-L. (2009). Understanding the
spreading patterns of mobile phone viruses. Science, 324(5930), 1071–1076.


Warkentin, M., Gefen, D., Pavlou, P. A., & Rose, G. M. (2002). Encouraging citizen
adoption of e-government by building trust. Electronic Markets, 12(3), 157–162.


Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing
a literature review. MIS Quarterly, xiii–xxiii.


Weerakkody, V., El-Haddadeh, R., Al-Sobhi, F., Shareef, M. A., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2013).
Examining the influence of intermediaries in facilitating e-government adoption: An
empirical investigation. International Journal of Information Management, 33(5),
716–725.


West, D. M. (2004). E-government and the transformation of service delivery and citizen
attitudes. Public Administration Review, 64(1), 15–27.


Yildiz, M. (2007). E-government research: Reviewing the literature, limitations, and ways
forward. Government Information Quarterly, 24(3), 646–665.


Zafiropoulos, K., Karavasilis, I., & Vrana, V. (2012). Assessing the adoption of e-govern-
ment services by teachers in Greece. Future Internet, 4(2), 528–544.


Bindu N. did her Masters in Computer Application programme in the Calicut University
in India. Currently, she is an Associate Professor in S. N. College, Cherthala, India and
pursuing her doctoral research in the Department of Futures Studies in the University of
Kerala, India. Her research interests include information system and e-governance.


Prem Sankar C is a research scholar in Futures studies department, Kerala University. He
did his M. Phil. Computer Science from IIITM-K after completing M.Tech in Technology
Management and MBA in Operations Management. His areas of specialisation include
Social network Analysis(SNA), Business Intelligence and Technology Forecasting and
Knowledge Management. He is passionate about the power of technologies and their
positive impact on business and society.


K. Satheesh Kumar received his MSc. in Mathematics from Annamalai University, India
in 1988 and his PhD under Faculty of Technology from Cochin University of Science and
Technology, India in 1998. He was a post-doctoral fellow at Monash University, Australia
and POSTECH at South Korea. Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the Department
of Futures Studies of University of Kerala, India and his research interests include com-
putational modelling and simulations, dynamics and rheology of suspensions and
polymer solutions, time series modelling and forecasting, and social network analysis.


N. Bindu, et al. Government Information Quarterly 36 (2019) 385–399


399



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0740-624X(17)30319-2/rf0570


