









Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


0040-1625/© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


A readiness assessment framework for Blockchain adoption: A healthcare 
case study 


Sreejith Balasubramanian a, Vinaya Shukla b, Jaspreet Singh Sethi a, Nazrul Islam c,*, 
Roy Saloum a 


a Middlesex University Dubai, Dubai, UAE 
b Middlesex University Business School, London, United Kingdom 
c University of Exeter Business School, Exeter, United Kingdom   


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords: 
Blockchain 
Readiness assessment framework 
Healthcare 
Stakeholder 
Covid-19 
Case study 
UAD 


A B S T R A C T   


Blockchain technology has been gaining traction across different sectors. It has the potential to immensely 
benefit the healthcare sector, given the sector’s inherent complexities, problems, and inefficiencies. However, to 
date, no comprehensive, evidence-based effort has been made to understand the readiness of this sector for 
blockchain adoption. We proposed a readiness assessment framework that encompasses the complex interplay of 
different underlying factors, social structures, and institutional mechanisms and that covers all key stakeholders. 
Based on a systematic literature review, the framework is applied to the UAE’s healthcare sector and its appli-
cability and usefulness is established. The findings show the multifaceted significance of government readiness in 
driving blockchain initiatives. Large firms are found to be more willing to leverage the opportunities afforded by 
blockchain. Lack of clarity on blockchain regulations and laws, and issues pertaining to privacy and trust are 
found to affect the readiness of all stakeholders. The proposed framework and the study’s findings will be useful 
in guiding policy interventions and developing support mechanisms to strengthen areas related to blockchain 
adoption.   


1. Introduction 


Blockchain or distributed ledger technology has attracted significant 
interest in recent years (White et al., 2020; Marsal-Llacuna, 2017). 
Governments and businesses are exploring ways to exploit the disruptive 
potential of this technology in various sectors, which would result in 
immutable, transparent, secure, and trustworthy solutions in both public 
and private settings (Casino et al., 2019). Among the various sectors, 
healthcare is highlighted as one of the key sectors to potentially benefit 
from blockchain adoption (McGhin et al., 2019; Tandon et al., 2020). 
Blockchain appears to be a natural fit for overcoming problems and 
inefficiencies inherent to the healthcare sector, such as counterfeiting, 
inaccurate healthcare data, lack of stakeholder collaboration, and pri-
vacy and security concerns (Mettler, 2016; Chukwu and Garg, 2020; 
Onik et al., 2019). 


However, a sector-wide implementation of any disruptive technol-
ogy (such as blockchain) is challenging. Assessing the “readiness” for 
new technology projects is critical; unanticipated challenges during 


implementation may result in failure (Razmi et al., 2009; Kiberu et al., 
2019). Given that blockchain is only as strong as its weakest link, un-
derstanding the differences in the readiness of the sector’s stakeholders 
is critical (Pólvora et al., 2020). 


Despite this criticality, however, research on blockchain readiness 
assessment is nascent. We encountered only two studies (Ozturan et al., 
2019; Vlachos et al., 2019), neither of which involved healthcare. 
Furthermore, these studies had a narrow scope with regard to devel-
oping a blockchain readiness index score and did not take into account 
the perspectives of different stakeholders and their mutual in-
terdependencies. This theoretical and empirical void motivated this 
work, which aimed to develop and apply a multi-dimensional block-
chain readiness assessment framework for the healthcare sector. In 
realizing this aim, the following questions are answered: 1) Who are the 
key stakeholders, and how do they collaborate and/or cooperate? 2) 
What are the key readiness dimensions of individual stakeholders, and 
how do they influence the sector? 3) What are the key facilitating 
conditions? 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: N.Islam@exeter.ac.uk (N. Islam).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Technological Forecasting & Social Change 


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120536 
Received 6 July 2020; Received in revised form 12 December 2020; Accepted 15 December 2020   



mailto:N.Islam@exeter.ac.uk

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00401625

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120536

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120536

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120536

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120536&domain=pdf




Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


2


This study makes several contributions. For its theoretical contri-
bution, it presents a novel blockchain readiness assessment framework 
and then tests its applicability through a multi-method case study in the 
UAE healthcare sector. The proposed framework fills a considerable gap 
in the literature, especially in healthcare, where no such framework 
exists. The framework is also adaptable and, given its conceptual 
comprehensiveness, has the potential to be applied in any sector or 
country. We expect practitioners and policymakers to find this frame-
work to be a valuable tool for assessing the readiness levels of key 
stakeholders and for understanding the multifaceted interplay of various 
factors and mechanisms. The study is timely; the inefficiencies of the 
healthcare sector have been exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
findings can guide policy interventions and support mechanisms to 
strengthen blockchain adoption in the healthcare sector. 


The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the next 
section, we review blockchain studies in the healthcare sector. The 
development of the blockchain readiness assessment framework is dis-
cussed in Section 3. Section 4 details the methodology used in applying 
the framework. The research findings are presented in Section 5 and 
further discussed in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7 with implica-
tions and suggestions for future research. 


2. Literature review and the development of blockchain 
readiness assessment framework 


A systematic review of the blockchain literature was undertaken 
using the Scopus database because of its broad coverage of journals. The 
keywords used to identify the initial list included “blockchain” or “block 
chain.” Conference proceedings, working papers, and book chapters 
were not considered to maintain rigor and quality of content. 


The initial search identified all the blockchain studies. After 
removing duplicates and limiting studies to those published in the 
business and management domain, the list was narrowed to 598 articles. 
Title and abstract screening were undertaken to further refine the list to 
studies that focused on healthcare in their investigation. Technical 


studies, such as those on blockchain architecture and algorithms, were 
excluded. The references cited in the shortlisted studies were also 
reviewed to identify (eight) additional articles, leaving twenty studies 
on blockchain in the healthcare sector for detailed analysis. Fig. 1 
summarizes the systematic review process followed. 


Our review of the studies (Table 1) revealed several gaps. First and 
foremost, no previous research was found to have examined the block-
chain readiness assessment in the healthcare sector. Second, the studies 
were either descriptive or conceptual, using secondary data. Attempts to 
gain first-hand insights into different aspects of blockchain adoption in 
healthcare through interviews, case studies, or surveys appeared to be 
limited. Moreover, the studies had a weak emphasis regarding under-
standing the interplay of underlying factors, social structures, and 
institutional mechanisms affecting the adoption of blockchain 
technologies. 


Despite these gaps, careful syntheses of these studies enabled us to 
understand various applications of blockchain in healthcare, its benefits, 
and implementation challenges. The roles of key stakeholders associated 
with blockchain adoption in healthcare and their concerns regarding 
various regulatory, privacy, and security issues were also explored. The 
review provided the initial conceptual base for the development of the 
blockchain readiness assessment framework. 


2.1. Components of the assessment framework 


The components of the framework were derived from key technology 
readiness assessment framework–related studies on blockchain 
(Ozturan et al., 2019; Vlachos et al., 2019), e-health (Li et al., 2012; 
Rezai-Rad et al., 2012; Kiberu et al., 2019), e-records (Malanga and 
Kamanga, 2019), cloud computing (Colicchio et al., 2015), enterprise 
resource planning (Razmi et al., 2009), and e-government (Shareef 
et al., 2008). 


Though most of these studies were narrow in scope, they provided a 
strong theoretical foundation for the development of the proposed 
framework. Combining existing frameworks into a comprehensive 


Fig. 1. Systematic Review of Blockchain Studies on the Healthcare Sector.  


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


3


Table 1 
Summary of Blockchain Studies in the Healthcare Sector.  


Study Country Methodology Primary Focus Relevant Stakeholders* Key Findings 


Nugent et al. 
(2016) 


UK Experimental Use of smart contracts Regulators; 
pharmaceuticals 


Application: Smart contracts; clinical trials with time- 
stamped data 
Benefits: Tamper-proof solution; enhanced trust and 
credibility; issues with clinical trials (missing data or data 
manipulation) can be addressed using blockchain 


Kuo et al. (2017) Generic Secondary 
research 


Blockchain for 
biomedical and healthcare 
applications 


Patients; business entities; 
service providers. 


Application: Medical record management; insurance claim 
process; clinical/biomedical research 
Benefits: Decentralized management; immutable audit trail; 
data provenance; robustness/availability; security/privacy 
Challenges: Transparency; confidentiality; speed; 
scalability; threat of a 51% attack 


Przhedetskiy 
et al. (2019) 


Russia Secondary 
research 


Security and stakeholder 
cooperation 


Government; healthcare 
institutions 


Application: A mechanism for electronic interaction 
between the government and healthcare institutions using 
blockchain technology 
Benefits: Simplicity in information access to all 
stakeholders; reduction in data errors; less maintenance, 
enhanced transparency and accountability of the data 
systems 


Bell et al. (2018) Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain Patients; government; 
business entities; 
researchers 


Application: Pharmaceutical traceability to fight 
counterfeiting; data sharing; overcoming fraudulent results 
in clinical trials; consent management; medical device/asset 
tracking 


Gassner (2018) Generic Secondary 
research 


Blockchain and General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
compliance issues 


Government; regulatory 
bodies; business entities; 
customers 


Benefits: Integration of various tasks; enhanced 
transparency and accountability; privacy and confidentiality 
Privacy issues with GDPR: Tensions between the rights to 
forget data in GDPR versus immutability of data in the 
blockchain 


Katuwal et al. 
(2018) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain Business entities; service 
providers 


Application: Management of electronic health records 
(EHR), genomic, and imaging data; clinical trials and data 
sharing; supply chain visibility; prescription management; 
data analytics; telemedicine; blockchain as a service 
Challenges: Technical (interoperability, scalability); legal 
(adherence of regulation, data privacy); governance (e.g., 
who controls the blockchain) 


Radanovic and 
Likic (2018) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain and 
challenges 


Government; business 
entities 


Application areas: Public health; medical education; health 
insurance; biomedical research; procurement; drug supply 
chain management 
Challenges: Lack of public and expert knowledge; data 
security and privacy 


Dhagarra et al. 
(2019) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Sharing of medical records Patients; government; 
business entities; 
researchers 


Application: Medical record sharing with storage in the 
cloud; biometric-enabled smart contracts for data access; big 
data analytics on cloud data for various stakeholder 
decision-making 
Success factors for implementation: Internet penetration; 
a capable IT sector; experience with public-private 
partnership (PPP) model; a centralized and unique ID system 
Implementation barriers: Technology barriers; lack of 
government support; intra-stakeholder, inter-stakeholder 
collaboration issues 


Dimitrov (2019) Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain Patients; business entities  Application: Electronic medical record; data management; 
healthcare data protection; healthcare analytics; 
telemedicine, monetization of user-controlled genomic data; 
smart contracts for patient data sharing 


Mackey et al. 
(2019) 


Generic Practitioner 
views 


Governance of blockchain and 
applications 


– Governance aspects: Goal of the blockchain and the need 
for it; decision on blockchain design type (private, public, 
hybrid); data sharing and access (who and what); control 
(who has the control); incentive schemes Application: 
Privacy-preserving predictive models; licensing and 
credentialing of medical professionals; improvement of 
clinical trials; biomedical research; supply chain 
management; genomics 


McGhin et al. 
(2019) 


Generic Literature 
Review 


Challenges and opportunities of 
blockchain in healthcare 


– Application: Smart contracts; fraud detection; identify 
verification; clinical trials; precision medicine 
Benefits: Interoperability; data sharing; mobility; security 
Challenges: Lack of standardization; privacy leakage; 
scalability; threat of a 51% attack 


Onik et al. 
(2019) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Data privacy using blockchain Customers; business 
entities; service providers 


Privacy concerns: Privacy concerns of personally 
identifiable information  
Application areas: Intelligent data management; smart 
ecosystem; digital supply chain; IoT and big data; health 
claims; medication adherence; improved R&D; countering 
fake medicines 
Benefits: Enhanced digital trust (security, identifiability, 
and traceability), the security of medical devices; 


(continued on next page) 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


4


framework allows simultaneous investigation of multiple theoretical 
perspectives (Carter and Easton, 2011). While we concede that no single 
framework is sufficient to fully assess the readiness of a sector, a 
concerted effort was made to ensure the comprehensiveness of the 
proposed framework. This included addressing pitfalls in the existing 
readiness frameworks as well as contextualizing (as opposed to aggre-
gating) these frameworks. Thus, the key components of the proposed 
framework are not directly inherited from other sectors; instead, it was 
carefully designed and contextualized based on our understanding of the 
healthcare sector and blockchain technologies. 


For instance, most studies have looked at readiness at an organiza-
tional level (e.g., Razmi et al., 2009). However, because stakeholders (e. 
g., service providers, governments, consumers) have different levels of 
readiness, readiness assessment at the firm level may not provide a 


complete picture (Li et al., 2012). The central task when developing any 
technology-oriented readiness assessment framework is defining the key 
stakeholders responsible for technology adoption. This is especially true 
for a multi-stakeholder–operated sector like healthcare, where the 
weakest one determines the blockchain’s strength (Chukwu and Garg, 
2020). Gaining acceptance from all stakeholders is important for 
blockchain’s sector-wide adoption. The key stakeholders identified in 
the literature review are i) governments, ii) business entities, iii) 
blockchain solution providers, and iv) customers/end-users (Table 1). 
The subsequent goal of the framework is to assess the readiness levels of 
individual stakeholders. The four key dimensions identified by the 
literature are motivational readiness, engagement readiness, technology 
readiness, and structural readiness (e.g., Li et al., 2012; Rezai-Rad et al., 
2012; Kiberu et al., 2019). 


Table 1 (continued ) 


Study Country Methodology Primary Focus Relevant Stakeholders* Key Findings 


interoperability and data sharing 
Challenges: Data storage on the blockchain; medical data 
volume and size; scalability; privacy 
Regulatory issues: GDPR does not approve on-chain data 
storage, so data has to be stored off-chain 


Patel (2019) Generic Secondary 
research 


A framework for  
sharing of medical 
imaging data via blockchain 


Patient; business entities Application: Use of blockchain for distributed data storage 
and sharing of medical imaging data of patients 
Benefits: No need for third-party intermediaries (clearing 
houses) as it enables patient-controlled image sharing; 
facilitates interoperability between providers; no need for 
the use of physical copy (e.g., a CD or DVD) and courier 
service for data transfer 
Challenges: Privacy and security concerns; perceived ease 
of use in using the system for patients; regulatory 
compliance 


Siyal et al. 
(2019) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain; 
implementation challenges 


Patient; business entities Application: Individualized and life-long patient care data 
on the blockchain; clinical trials; pharmaceutical supply 
chain management; countering fake drugs; biomedical 
research in precision medicine; neural control systems for 
storing brain data 
Benefits: Longitudinal patient data (valuable for chronic 
diseases); patient control of data; security and privacy; audit 
control of data; enhancing data integrity in clinical trials – 
enrolling patients, getting their consent 
Challenges: Privacy in the absence of the third party for 
authorization; the threat of a 51% attack; blockchain not 
designed for heavy data generated by the medical industry; 
interoperability between multiple blockchains; social 
acceptance by professionals; limited solution providers 


Yoon (2019) Generic Opinion piece Patient-centric blockchain Patients Benefits: Transition from institutional-driven 
interoperability to patient-centered interoperability 
Challenges: Sensitivity and volume of medical data would 
result in it being stored somewhere else, and only tag that 
information on the blockchain 


De Aguiar et al. 
(2020) 


Generic Secondary 
research 


Applications of blockchain; 
implementation challenges 


Business entities; service 
providers; customers. 


Application: Sharing healthcare records; sharing imaging in 
radiology safely; securing logs generated in accessing patient 
information; remote care; supply chain management 
Challenges: Throughput; latency due to increasing 
transactions causing a delay in diagnosis; security risks; 
resource consumption; usability issues due to technical 
complexity; privacy concerns 


Albahli et al. 
(2020) 


Saudi 
Arabia 


Secondary 
research 


User-controlled data sharing Patients; business entities; 
service providers 


Application: Patient data sharing using a combination of 
public and private blockchain with users owning their data 
on the cloud 


Chukwu and 
Garg (2020) 


Generic Literature 
Review 


Blockchain as an alternative to 
EHR 


– Benefits: Enhanced trust; security; privacy 
Challenges: High costs; lower performance; data storage 
issues 


Khatoon (2020) Ireland Secondary 
research 


Developing a smart contract 
system 


Patients; business entities; 
researchers. 


Application: Medical record handling and sharing with 
multiple stakeholders 
Benefits: Low cost of smart contracts; enhanced auditability; 
interoperability; accessibility 


Tandon et al. 
(2020) 


Generic Literature 
Review 


Development of a framework for 
Block-chain based healthcare 
ecosystem 


Patients; business entities; 
government; service 
providers 


Application: Medical diagnostics; research; treatment 
protocol; disease calibration 
Benefits: Enhanced performance and value creation 
Challenges: Costs; data protection and data sharing 
concerns; security concerns 
Regulatory issues: Compliance and data ownership issues  


* Blank cell means specific stakeholders are not considered in those studies. 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


5


In addition, assessing engagement levels among stakeholders, which 
has been missing from existing frameworks, is important; the main 
roadblock to blockchain adoption is their lack of cooperation, collabo-
ration, communication, and coordination (Dhagarra et al., 2019). Un-
derstanding and enhancing multi-stakeholder relationships are, 
therefore, critical for blockchain adoption in healthcare (Katuwal et al., 
2018; Pólvora et al., 2020). 


The final aspect of the framework involves an understanding of the 
facilitating conditions required for blockchain adoption. This is critical 
because these conditions could directly influence the readiness of 
stakeholders. While studies have considered some facilitating conditions 
in their assessment frameworks, most have overlooked several key 
conditions. Those most relevant for blockchain adoption in the health-
care sector include regulatory and legal aspects, innovation propensity, 
privacy and trust, and supporting infrastructure (e.g., Dhagarra et al., 
2019; Gassner, 2018; Onik et al., 2019). 


2.1.1. Key stakeholders 
Governments: They are regarded as the most important stakeholder 


as their involvement in blockchain adoption can be multifaceted. First, 
they can themselves implement blockchain solutions to make public 
sector services more efficient, secure, and transparent (Nugent et al., 
2016; Przhedetskiy et al., 2019). Second, governments can encourage 
other stakeholders to implement blockchain solutions by designing 
blockchain-friendly legislation or by providing related funding or in-
centives such as tax exemptions (Clohessy and Acton, 2019). 


Business Entities: “Business entities” here refers to the complex 
network of organizations in the healthcare sector, such as healthcare 
service providers (hospitals, clinics), pharmacies, insurance providers, 
health research centers, and drug and equipment manufacturing com-
panies, among others. Depending on the blockchain solutions, the 
involvement of all or a limited number of business entities is required. 
For instance, for the implementation of a patient records management 
system, the direct participation of manufacturing companies or research 
centers may not be required, though they may be interested. By contrast, 
for an end-to-end supply chain traceability solution in the blockchain (to 
tackle counterfeit goods), all supply chain entities from research centers 
to pharmacies would have to be involved. Typically, business entities 
have the option of either developing their own blockchain solutions or 
participating in others’. 


Blockchain Solution Providers: These are companies such as IBM, 
Microsoft, Amazon, and consortiums such as R3 that provide purpose- 
built tools to implement blockchain solutions. The healthy competi-
tion among these large corporations is facilitating faster adoption of 
blockchain solutions. There are also over 11,000 startups offering 
blockchain solutions for businesses and governments, with a significant 
number receiving funding (Tracxn, 2020). The healthcare sector is 
receiving increasing attention from these companies and startups. For 
instance, the IBM Rapid Supplier Connect blockchain network was 
developed during the COVID-19 pandemic to equip frontline workers 
with necessary equipment. This platform enables governments, hospi-
tals, pharmacies, and others to locate pre-qualified suppliers of medical 
gowns, surgical masks, and gloves with greater efficiency (IBM, 2020). 


Customers/End-users: The willingness and ability of customers to 
participate in a blockchain ecosystem are critical to its widespread 
adoption. Thus, most blockchain solutions are customer-centric as 
opposed to institution-centric (Yoon, 2019). Customers should see 
tangible payoffs in participating in blockchain-enabled services. This is 
even more relevant to healthcare, where patients have the rights to 
consent and to choose how their data is used in exchange for health 
services or even compensation (Albahli et al., 2020). This shift from 
provider-centric to patient-centric permissioned blockchain system 
empowers the patient and provides an immutable audit trail of the 
“whose,” “when,” “where,” and “what” of accessing personal health data 
(Mackey et al., 2019). The need for patient-centric healthcare is ex-
pected to promote the sector-wide adoption of blockchain solutions. 


2.1.2. Dimensions of individual stakeholder readiness 
Motivational Readiness: Also known as “core readiness,” this refers 


to a recognized need for change vis-à-vis an existing service or circum-
stance (Kiberu et al., 2019). It usually starts with dissatisfaction with 
practices or services presently offered (Li et al., 2012). Unless this 
motivation is activated, an individual or organization is unlikely to 
initiate change in behaviors. In the healthcare sector, for example, this 
could be a realization of problems pertaining to poor service or breached 
patient privacy. 


Engagement Readiness: This refers to knowledge and awareness of 
new initiatives as well as clear recognition of their benefits and potential 
challenges (Li et al., 2012; Rezai-Rad et al., 2012; Kiberu et al., 2019). 
For blockchain technologies, this includes knowledge of how they 
function, potential impacts on current systems, difficulties related to 
developmental costs, risks of failure, and potential benefits of smart 
contracts (Ozturan et al., 2019). Any stakeholder with high engagement 
readiness would explore the possibility of using blockchain technology 
as well as express any fears or concerns about using the technology. 


Technology Readiness: This refers to the individual or organiza-
tional predispositions to embrace new technologies (Kamble et al., 
2019). The contributing factors include the availability, ability, and 
compatibility of existing hardware, software, networks, applications, 
and other information and communications technology (ICT) resources 
that facilitate the new technology (Kiberu et al., 2019). Further, the 
robustness of an organization’s security infrastructure, cloud infra-
structure, and internet connection bandwidth also contributes to tech-
nology readiness (Rezai-Rad et al., 2012; Kiberu et al., 2019). In the case 
of individual customers, this refers to having access to/ownership of 
technologies such as personal computers, tablets, smartphones, 
high-speed internet, and 4 G/5 G mobile connectivity. 


Structural Readiness: This refers to the availability of non-technical 
resources—financial and human resources—to invest in the adoption of 
new processes or technologies, as well as having supporting organiza-
tional structures and policies in place (Li et al., 2012; Kiberu et al., 
2019). Implementation of blockchain technologies would demand 
valuable resources, such as time, money, and personnel, from an orga-
nization. Organizations with greater resource availability, such as ICT 
experts, would be more confident in implementing blockchain tech-
nologies (Rezai-Rad et al., 2012). Conversely, resource scarcity could 
hinder the pursuit of new initiatives. From a customer perspective, 
structural readiness relates to the ability to use computers, smartphones, 
and the internet for daily tasks (Rezai-Rad et al., 2012). 


2.1.3. Key stakeholder relationships for blockchain adoption 
Governments and Business Entities: Public-private collaboration 


is important for co-designing and piloting innovative blockchain pro-
jects (World Economic Forum, 2019). For instance, the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) worked with Pfizer, a pharmaceutical 
company that has lost billions in revenue due to counterfeit drugs, on an 
RFID-based blockchain solution where patients and doctors could trust 
the source and capabilities of medicines. This also allowed wholesalers 
and pharmacists to verify the authenticity of medicines using a simple 
RFID scanner (Bell et al., 2018). The European Commission Research & 
Innovation Program has developed a pilot project, “Blockchain-Enabled 
Healthcare,” in partnership with Novartis on the Ethereum platform 
(Dimitrov, 2019). Russia has also effectively rolled out blockchain 
technologies in the healthcare sector, using effective public-private 
partnerships (Przhedetskiy et al., 2019). 


Government and Blockchain Solution Providers: For large-scale 
government projects, developing formal partnerships with established 
blockchain solution providers and working closely with them is essen-
tial. For instance, the government of Estonia worked with Guardtime, an 
enterprise blockchain solution provider, to develop the world’s largest 
blockchain platform, with almost 100% of government services, 
including healthcare, being offered through this platform (Onik et al., 
2019; Siyal et al., 2019; Chukwu and Garg, 2020). In the healthcare 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


6


sector, for example, Booz Allen Hamilton Consulting developed and 
implemented a blockchain-based pilot on the Ethereum platform; it was 
designed to help the FDA explore using the technology for healthcare 
data management (Dimitrov, 2019). 


Government and Customers: Governments worldwide are 
attempting to be more efficient by reaching out to people directly 
without intermediaries. For example, Smart Dubai, a Dubai government 
initiative, has developed a blockchain platform that allows citizens, 
residents, visitors, and businesses to pay online for government trans-
actions (Smart Dubai, 2020a). In 2018, Smart Dubai conducted more 
than 10.4 million transactions through its blockchain platform (World 
Economic Forum, 2020). The United Nations’ World Food Programme 
has used blockchain technology to help more than 10,000 Syrian refu-
gees in Jordan receive rations from supermarkets near their camp. The 
blockchain system uses retina scans instead of cash, vouchers, or e‑cards, 
thereby ensuring that food reaches the right person (World Food Pro-
gramme, 2017). In Estonia, 99% of patients have access to their digital 
health records through their country’s blockchain platform (Chukwu 
and Garg, 2020). 


Business Entities and Blockchain Solution Providers: A close 
association between various business entities and blockchain solution 
providers, including niche and startup providers, is critical for novel 
blockchain solutions. For instance, researchers at Massachusetts General 
Hospital, one of the top five US hospitals, are collaborating with Korean 
blockchain startup MediBloc to find better ways to store and share pa-
tient data (Waxman et al., 2019). Similarly, several pharmaceutical 
companies have collaborated with software corporation SAP on block-
chain solutions for supply chain tracking and counterfeit drug identifi-
cation during the COVID-19 pandemic (Bio World, 2020). IBM is leading 
a multi-stakeholder collaboration with healthcare service providers, 
insurance providers, and banks to create a blockchain healthcare 
network for information exchange that improves transparency and 
interoperability (Reuters, 2019). 


Business Entities and Customers: The need for direct, fast, and 
automated interaction between business entities and customers is rising. 
Wang et al. (2019) highlighted the importance of activating blockchain 
technology to deepening consumer relationships. Their study found that 
blockchain applications can improve both intrinsic and extrinsic moti-
vations of customers in loyalty programs. AXA, a leading French insur-
ance group, has developed its own Ethereum-based platform called 
“Fizzy.” It offers automatic flight delay insurance for its customers, thus 
avoiding the need for additional paperwork (Radanović and Likić, 
2018). In the healthcare sector, companies have realized the value of 
dealing with customers directly, albeit enabled via blockchain. For 
example, Nebula Genomics offers whole-genome sequencing free of 
charge for customers in return for data ownership to build their 
blockchain-based genetic marketplace (Ahmed and Shabani, 2019). 


Blockchain Solution Providers and Customers: Consulting firms 
such as Deloitte have developed proofs-of-concept for customer-centric 
blockchain solutions such as Know Your Customer (KYC) re-
quirements. This complete customer profile will be useful for financial 
institutions, insurance companies, exchanges, and solutions vendors. It 
allows a seamless onboarding experience for customers and eliminates 
costly background checks and overheads (George et al., 2019). Deloitte 
has also developed a blockchain proof-of-concept for automobile loans 
that simplifies the lending process. It creates an automobile loan 
marketplace that connects dealers, lenders, and customers through the 
blockchain network and facilitates the process of smart loans (Deloitte, 
2020). In the healthcare sector, EpigenCare, a blockchain startup, uses 
blockchain technology to recommend beauty products to customers 
directly by examining their DNA and skin epigenetics (PR Newswire, 
2018). 


Multi-stakeholder Engagement: In addition to the dyadic re-
lationships between stakeholders, multi-stakeholder engagement, 
including with competitors, is critical for developing blockchain solu-
tions (Pólvora et al., 2020). For instance, the US FDA has worked with 


four companies—IBM, Merck, KPMG, and Walmart—on a pilot project 
developing an interoperable system that will identify and trace pre-
scription drugs (FDA DSCSA, 2020). Similarly, MiPasa is a multi-party 
(involving IBM, Microsoft, the Wharton School, and scientists), 
multi-source verifiable data-sharing blockchain platform that was 
established to provide timely, trustworthy data as well as associated 
analytics on the COVID-19 outbreak (MiPasa, 2020). 


2.1.4. Key facilitating conditions 
Supportive Regulatory and Legal Structures: This includes gov-


ernment policies, directives, regulations, laws, and judicial in-
terpretations (Vlachos et al., 2019). Depending on the appetite for 
innovation, policies can be either restrictive or permissive. Leaning too 
far on either end of this spectrum can yield negative results: stagnation if 
the policy is too restrictive, or harmful compromise if it is too permissive 
(Kimani et al., 2020). Many blockchains are associated with smart 
contracts; the legal validity of these contracts, as opposed to traditional 
ones, could be a concern for businesses (Giancaspro, 2017). These 
concerns would be even more valid in healthcare, where a patient’s 
health or even life could be at stake (McGhin et al., 2019). Therefore, to 
facilitate blockchain adoption, regulatory and legal frameworks must 
evolve parallelly with the development of new blockchain applications, 
and blockchain applications must learn to comply with these 
regulations. 


Innovation Propensity: Innovation culture is critical for wide-
spread blockchain adoption. Several studies have used innovation the-
ory to explain blockchain adoption (Clohessy and Acton, 2019). Here, 
innovation includes not only technological innovation but also service 
innovation, service delivery innovation, administrative and organiza-
tional innovation, conceptual innovation, policy innovation, and sys-
temic innovation (Windrum, 2008). Supportive policies and 
public-private partnerships to bolster innovation are likely to facilitate 
additional blockchain applications (Dhagarra et al., 2019). 


Privacy and Trust: Sensitive and personal healthcare data must be 
handled with the utmost privacy and trust because of their potential for 
abuse and discrimination. According to a global IPSOS/World Economic 
Forum study in 2019, 41% of people do not trust their healthcare pro-
viders with regard to their private data (IPSOS, 2019). According to 
estimates, an individual patient’s data could be worth as much as USD 
7000 per year (Dimitrov, 2019). Assuring stakeholders that their infor-
mation is private, safe, and anonymous is critical for the adoption of 
blockchain applications. Stakeholder trust in the blockchain technology 
as well as the blockchain consensus mechanisms (participants agreeing 
to trust the network consensus) are also essential, especially for auto-
mated smart contracts (Mackey et al., 2019; Onik et al., 2019). While the 
blockchain itself may be trustworthy, in the case of private-permissioned 
blockchains, the network participants must be carefully selected as they 
will have access to sensitive data on the chain. 


Supporting Infrastructure: These are diverse factors that act as 
accelerants for blockchain adoption. They include attracting and sup-
porting startups developing blockchain technologies, such as through 
accelerator programs (Vlachos et al., 2019). The other critical factor that 
hastens blockchain adoption is the ability of the sector to attract in-
vestors to fund blockchain companies and projects (Vlachos et al., 
2019). Collaboration with sectors such as telecommunications and cloud 
solution providers also enhances blockchain solution–related infra-
structure (Dhagarra et al., 2019). 


2.2. Proposed blockchain readiness assessment framework 


Fig. 2 shows the proposed integrated readiness assessment frame-
work for blockchain. Central to the framework is the stakeholders and 
their strategic relationships. The overall readiness of each stakeholder is 
captured through the four readiness dimensions. Finally, the differential 
influence of the facilitating conditions on the readiness of stakeholders is 
captured. The framework provides a comprehensive approach for 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


7


researchers and policymakers to assess the blockchain adoption readi-
ness of the healthcare sector or any other sector in any country. 


3. Application of the framework in the healthcare sector 


Once we developed the assessment framework, the next stage was to 
test its applicability. While it could be tested anywhere, a setting that is 
experiencing a significant push toward blockchain adoption and 
healthcare advancement could be more practically relevant. The UAE 
was chosen as the case country as it is among the few countries in the 
world to have adopted a national blockchain strategy (UAE, 2020). 
Providing world-class healthcare is also one of the six pillars of the UAE 
agenda (UAE Vision 2021, 2019). Thus, the UAE provides an ideal 
setting to assess opportunities and challenges associated with block-
chain adoption in healthcare. 


A case study approach was deemed most appropriate because we 
were examining a contemporary topic in a real-world situation (Yin, 
2009). Although the study adopted was a single case design (UAE 
healthcare sector), it featured an embedded case design with multiple 
units of analysis (Yin, 2009). In terms of methods, a pragmatic, 
sequential multi-methodology approach was employed to develop a 
comprehensive understanding of various strands of the framework and, 
in the process, answer the research questions. The use of a pragmatic 
approach was justified given that practical, realistic solutions are needed 
to inform practice, especially considering the newness of the topic. 
Therefore, as in other case study research into blockchain, empirical 
data were compiled via multiple methods and sources (Islam et al., 
2019), as shown in Table 2. 


First, qualitative, secondary data from reliable sources relevant to 
blockchain adoption in UAE healthcare (refer Table 2) were assembled, 
coded, and analyzed in line with the research questions. To ensure 
reliability and rigor in the secondary data, we considered only reports 
from leading consulting firms, governments, and global organizations. 


In the next phase, primary research was conducted to complement 
and to fill the gaps in the secondary sources. For consumers, primary 
data were collected in two consecutive phases using a sequential 
explanatory design. First, a customer/patient-centric survey was con-
ducted, followed by semi-structured interviews with individuals 
residing in the UAE for at least five years. 


The non-technical, random-sample survey (response rate of 22%) 
targeted 100 residents. The survey assessed the following: their general 


Fig. 2. Blockchain Readiness Assessment Framework.  


Table 2 
Summary of Primary and Secondary Information Sources.  


Primary Sources Secondary Sources 


Interviewee 1 – Chief Technology Architect 
- Experience - 25+ years in IT 
- Responsible for leading the 


blockchain initiative at the hospital 
Interviewee 2 – IT Security and 
Compliance Lead  


- Experience - 30+ years in IT 
- Expert knowledge in blockchain 


technologies and has led several 
blockchain projects 
Interviewee 3 –Head of Fintech, 
Blockchain & Emerging  


- Experience - 15 years in the legal 
field 


- Expert Legal Consultant, 
responsible for advising government 
agencies, businesses as well as startup 
advisor on blockchain and other 
emerging technologies 
Interviewee 4 -Service Delivery Manager, 
Infrastructure & Data Center  


- Experience – 12 years in IT 
- Expert in Cloud computing and 


blockchain technologies 
Interviewee 5 – Healthcare Researcher 
(Government entity) 


- Experience – 10 years as a 
healthcare researcher 


- Expert in healthcare policies and 
regulatory compliance of new 
technologies 
Interviews with Customers 


- Six customer interviews 
- The average number of years 


residing in the UAE – 9 years 
- Three working professionals and 


three homemakers 
Survey with Customers 


- 22 responses from 100 random 
samples (22% response rate) 


- The average number of years 
residing in the UAE – 9 years 


- All working professionals 


• Industry reports - e.g., 
Pricewatercoopers, KPMG 
• Government reports 
• Global Organizations Report – e.g., 
World Bank, World Economic Forum 
• Government policy documents  
• News Articles 
• Websites  
• Global Survey Reports - e.g., World 
Economic Forum, United Nations 
• Industry Case Studies 
• Successful Use Cases 
• Miscellaneous – e.g., Blogs, Public 
forums  


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


8


willingness to voluntarily share data with other stakeholders; privacy 
and security concerns regarding their healthcare data; the effort taken to 
gage whether the medical products they purchased were original; the 
importance allocated to the country of origin of products; the need to 
have access to healthcare data at any time; concerns relating to the 
quality of imported medicines/products; general awareness of block-
chain and decentralized systems; and willingness to use/participate in 
these systems. 


The in-depth semi-structured customer interviews involved six par-
ticipants selected using a purposive sampling technique to encourage 
diversity of gender and nationality. Each interview was approximately 
50–60 min. The interviewees were briefed on blockchain technology 
and questioned on the lines of the survey questions and responses with a 
focus on “how,” “what,” and “why.” In addition, they were asked about 
the positives and negatives of the UAE healthcare system and changes 
they would like to see post-COVID-19 pandemic. Follow-up questions 
were also asked regarding anticipated benefits and challenges with the 
implementation of blockchain technologies, with cues occasionally 
provided to generate meaningful insights. The responses to the survey 
and interviews were then compiled with the secondary data to derive a 
meaningful generalization of customer readiness for blockchain 
adoption. 


Additionally, five expert interviews were conducted to complement 
and triangulate the secondary findings and to identify discrepancies (if 
any). Again, purposive sampling was used to ensure that we included 
key stakeholders with a strong understanding of blockchain technolo-
gies. The experts were probed on their readiness across different readi-
ness dimensions, their association with other stakeholders, and the 
influence of various facilitating conditions. These interviews lasted 
approximately 45–60 min. 


The data drawn from the various sources (Table 2) were categorized 
and coded. Two authors independently coded the data to ensure con-
sistency. The first stage involved a thematic analysis of data for each 
stakeholder. The categorized data for each stakeholder group were 
further identified and classified into four readiness sub-themes. The 
second stage of the analysis involved axial coding, in which pairs of 
stakeholder groups were analyzed together to identify and code dyadic 
relationships. For this, data corresponding to stakeholder groups was 
examined together. For example, relevant data for the association be-
tween a government and a blockchain solution provider were coded and 
categorized. Any evidence of multi-stakeholder relationships (involving 
more than two stakeholders) or international stakeholder relationships 
(involving entities in different countries) were categorized separately 
and coded. In the third stage, the secondary and corresponding primary 
data were categorized and coded under the facilitating conditions. 
Finally, findings related to each stakeholder were summarized as “Low,” 
“Moderate,” or “High” based on the amount and strength of the evidence 
identified. To improve reliability, the summarization was conducted 
independently by two authors. 


4. Case study findings 


The findings are organized in line with the readiness assessment 
framework and research questions. However, before the findings are 
provided, an overview of the UAE healthcare sector is provided to give 
context. 


The UAE healthcare sector has witnessed astonishing growth, from a 
few hospitals to over 125 public and private hospitals (US-UAE Business 
Council, 2018). The sector is competitive, with healthy rivalries among 
several foreign and domestic players. The UAE government has also 
implemented several citizen-centric initiatives in the sector. For 
instance, healthcare insurance is mandatory in the UAE, providing basic 
coverage for all citizens and residents. Moreover, medical tourism is on 
the rise; Dubai alone is expecting 500,000+ international health tourists 
annually by 2021. Blockchain has been recognized as a potential inno-
vation area of focus for the sector (US-UAE Business Council, 2018). 


4.1. Stakeholder readiness for blockchain adoption 


Stakeholder readiness gauges the extent to which UAE healthcare 
stakeholders are ready to support and promote the awareness, imple-
mentation, and use of blockchain solutions. 


4.1.1. Government readiness 
The UAE government is not only the most important stakeholder for 


blockchain adoption—it is evidently the readiest. All expert in-
terviewees agreed that the federal and state governments are the key 
stakeholders responsible for the growing interest in blockchain. At the 
emirate level, participants highlighted various initiatives such as Dubai 
Health Strategy and Abu Dhabi Healthcare Strategic Plan (for devel-
oping a world-class healthcare ecosystem), demonstrating strong moti-
vational readiness. 


Interviewees also highlighted the UAE government’s support of 
blockchain technology, particularly its Blockchain Strategy 2021 (UAE, 
2020) and the fact that many public sector entities are adopting block-
chain solutions (World Economic Forum, 2020). An interviewee from a 
government entity described several programs undertaken by the Dubai 
government, such as the “Dubai Blockchain Strategy” for migrating key 
government processes including healthcare records to blockchain, in 
addition to the “Dubai Blockchain Policy,” which encourages businesses 
to adopt blockchain technologies, thereby demonstrating strong 
engagement readiness. In technology readiness, the UAE was ranked 
first in the world in government procurement of advanced technology 
products (Network Readiness Index, 2019). The UAE government is also 
well-positioned from a structural readiness perspective as it is the largest 
spender in the healthcare sector. 


4.1.2. Business entity readiness 
Several issues related to motivational and engagement readiness 


were echoed throughout the interviews. According to respondents, core 
challenges facing UAE healthcare firms, especially small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs), in blockchain implementation are related to lack of 
knowledge and awareness, and regulatory rather than technical issues. 
One interviewee (from a blockchain solution provider) mentioned that 
many small firms are unfamiliar with the term “blockchain,” but have 
heard of Bitcoin. According to a recent study of UAE SMEs, 63% of firms 
are unaware of industry 4.0 technologies, including blockchain, and 
their relevance to their business operations (Dubai SME, 2019). For 
SMEs that are aware of blockchain, according to respondents, their 
reluctance is potentially due to the poor reputation of cryptocurrency, 
and many firms perceive them as indistinguishable and are therefore 
concerned about legal and regulatory issues. This is in line with gov-
ernment findings that SMEs in the UAE are not adequately aware of key 
contemporary technologies and trends; thus, their preparedness for the 
adoption of such technologies in the near future is reduced (Dubai SME, 
2019). This is a concern given that the majority (more than 95%) of 
businesses in the UAE (including in healthcare) are SMEs. 


Most entities in the UAE private sector that have engaged with 
blockchain technologies are large corporations. Some of the successful 
use cases in blockchain implementation in the UAE involve large firms in 
banking (e.g., Emirates Bank), airlines (e.g., Emirates Airlines), logistics 
and supply chain (e.g., Dubai Ports), and telecommunications (e.g., 
Etisalat). As evidenced in the interviews, this was primarily because the 
implementation of blockchain is part of the long-term strategic focus of 
large firms, while the focus of SMEs is more short-term and cost- 
oriented. One interviewee (chief technology architect responsible for 
blockchain implementation in a large multinational hospital) high-
lighted the importance of having a long-term strategy to leverage the full 
benefits of blockchain. Other respondents echoed this; firms looking to 
implement blockchain must not look for immediate but rather long-term 
benefits. 


From the technological and structural readiness perspectives, the 
readiness of UAE business entities is relatively high. Evidence from a 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


9


recent study suggests that the readiness of private-sector firms to adopt 
current ICT is high; 98% in Dubai use computing devices with connec-
tivity for daily business operations, and 74% use cloud storage. The 
percentage of SMEs in the UAE with a dedicated IT budget has increased 
from 27% in 2013 to 73% in 2019 (Dubai SME, 2019). 


4.1.3. Solution provider readiness 
The results of the interviews indicated that the general readiness of 


UAE blockchain solution providers across all four dimensions is rela-
tively high. Many leading global enterprise IT and business consulting 
firms are actively involved in promoting blockchain in the UAE. Com-
panies such as Microsoft, SAP, IBM, and Cisco are part of the Dubai 
Future Foundations’ Global Blockchain Council (DMCC, 2020). Several 
large domestic enterprises have also started offering the blockchain 
platform. Over 120 blockchain companies are present in the UAE, 
including many startups; more than 200 projects are active (World 
Economic Forum, 2020). Leading consulting firms such as Pricewa-
terhouseCoopers are working with governments and businesses to 
establish blockchain policies and strategies (PwC, 2019). 


While general readiness is promising, the focus of blockchain solu-
tion providers on the healthcare sector is not. However, this is not a 
problem specific to the UAE given that the healthcare sector, in general, 
have been lagging in blockchain implementation. When we interrogated 
interviewees on the lack of focus on healthcare among blockchain so-
lution providers, the respondents highlighted that this is mainly due to 
the complexity associated with the sector and compliance-related issues 
regarding patient data. According to the interviewees, other sectors, 
including the public sector, are in focus as they are considered low- 
hanging fruit by providers. However, the respondents were confident 
that providers would eventually turn their attention to the healthcare 
sector. They stated that at present, the proof-of-concept to imple-
mentation ratio is very low in the healthcare sector. One interviewee 
from the healthcare sector mentioned that they were receiving calls from 
blockchain solution providers daily and that providers were sending 
technical materials and successful blockchain use cases regarding 
implementation. One respondent expressed a desire to see more niche 
blockchain solution providers in the fitness and wellness domains—two 
growth areas in the UAE. Another respondent expressed disappointment 
with regard to the vast amount of healthcare data that is generated in the 
UAE, but not analyzed. However, he expressed confidence that post- 
COVID-19, there will be more government and private-sector spending 
in the sector to enhance its preparedness for future pandemics. 


4.1.4. Customer readiness 
The findings of the interviews and survey show a relatively high 


customer (general public) readiness across all four readiness di-
mensions. The high motivational readiness is largely due to dissatis-
faction with the services presently offered in the UAE healthcare sector. 
Most customers interviewed expressed a desire to see changes to existing 
services. The interviewees were unified concerns related to long wait 
times, improper diagnoses, and the interoperability of healthcare service 
providers. One interviewee stated, “even when I went to a different 
clinic within the same provider network, they didn’t have access to my 
medical records, which made diagnosis difficult.” Another respondent 
had similar concerns: “I lost all my medical records with my provider 
after they changed their software or application; any previous data they 
had was lost forever.” One interviewee highlighted that their pediatri-
cian lost access to their children’s data when he switched jobs to another 
provider. Two respondents noted their displeasure with the insurance 
claims process. One remarked, “the insurance provider and the hospital 
will blame each other for the delay, and as customers, we are ones who 
suffer.” Some interviewees mentioned that they had experienced some 
form of data entry error with a healthcare service provider, either in 
their own profile or in the profile of a family member. Motivation 
readiness was reflected in the customer survey as well. For instance, 
95% of respondents reported that they were concerned whether the 


medical products they were buying, especially medications, were 
original. 


Regarding engagement readiness, when we explained to in-
terviewees, in layperson terms, some of the benefits of blockchain, such 
as accurate electronic health records (EHRs), data sharing, and inter-
operability, most expressed excitement and readiness to engage with 
these applications. One expressed a desire to have their family health 
records data linked (with their consent), in order to understand patterns 
and vulnerabilities in their family health histories and enhance pre-
ventive measures. Others mentioned that these solutions (such as EHRs 
and patient data sharing) would improve the accuracy and usefulness of 
patient information, especially during emergencies such as road acci-
dents. One respondent (along similar lines) highlighted the possible 
benefits that accurate historical records would have provided in the 
context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, not just in the UAE but 
worldwide. More than 85% of the survey participants mentioned that 
they had heard or had some understanding of blockchain and that they 
were willing to use/participate in blockchain networks. 


The evidence from the customer survey showed high technical and 
structural readiness, in general, for new technologies. For instance, 86% 
of the respondents indicated that they would like to have ready access to 
their medical reports and tests. Further, 85% stated they would use 
blockchain or similar technologies to track the country of origin of 
products and their condition during transit through the supply chain. 
This was not surprising given that drug and product counterfeiting is a 
major concern in healthcare (Mettler, 2016). 


4.2. Stakeholder engagement in blockchain initiatives 


The engagement (cooperation, collaboration, communication, and 
coordination) of stakeholders is critical for blockchain adoption. This 
includes exploring new opportunities together and working together 
during and after implementation to ensure project success. As else-
where, stakeholder engagement is a challenge in the UAE. The lack of 
stakeholder engagement is an even greater concern for the healthcare 
sector. This is because, vis-à-vis other sectors, the sector has seen limited 
blockchain initiatives. Table 3 summarizes the key initiatives. More than 
half of the projects involved government entities. This reaffirms our 
findings that the government is the key stakeholders responsible for 
driving blockchain initiatives in the UAE, including the healthcare 
sector. The evidence also indicates that except for two startup initiatives, 
all projects involved large firms. This supports our interview findings. 
Another concern is the lack of consortium or multi-stakeholder projects 
involving multiple hospitals, as witnessed in other sectors, and the lack 
of international collaboration or global blockchain partnerships. 


Challenges in stakeholder engagement were also evidenced during 
the expert interviews. One respondent stated: “Blockchain is not a pri-
vate or single entity–held technology; hence, if you are planning to 
implement, then all the stakeholders should take the same step because 
each stakeholder has their own actionable part in it.” Most respondents 
highlighted issues relating to interoperability across healthcare entities. 
One interviewee gave an example that if a hospital in the UAE or else-
where wanted to view patient data, they would be able to do so only 
after becoming part of the blockchain network. If other entities are not 
using blockchain or are not part of the destination entity blockchain, 
they cannot access or add to existing patient records on the blockchain of 
the destination entity, defeating the purpose of having a blockchain. One 
respondent highlighted the importance of stakeholders working 
together to achieve seamless connectivity or interoperability between 
independent blockchain platforms. 


However, there are certain advantages as well. First, most blockchain 
projects that have been initiated are customer/patient-centric and have 
a direct, positive impact on people’s lives. For instance, the Hayat donor 
registry has been able to record the will of thousands of registered do-
nors on their blockchain-based application. Participating hospitals can 
verify through the platform DNA matches of donors and recipients, 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


10


thereby reducing organ trafficking. Similarly, the emergence of two 
promising blockchain startups, BodyO and Liber Health, is encouraging 
enough to provide the impetus for other health-tech startups to use 
blockchain technologies. The relevance of the technology will be even 
higher given the COVID-19 pandemic because healthcare providers are 
looking for solutions such as contactless biometric identification 
systems. 


4.3. Facilitating conditions 


The various conditions facilitating blockchain adoption and their 
influence on the readiness of stakeholders are discussed in the following 
sections. 


4.3.1. Regulatory and policy environment 
While the UAE is making significant efforts to develop sound policies 


and a friendly regulatory environment for blockchain adoption, several 
concerns remain. According to the interviewees, “regulatory uncer-
tainty” is the topmost challenge for both business entities and block-
chain solution providers. According to one respondent, “regulation in 
the UAE to date has considered blockchain as a crypto asset and there-
fore applies the same legal framework that is used to regulate crypto-
currencies.” Another respondent highlighted that their legal team was 
working hard to gain insights into the current regulatory framework 
governing blockchain technologies and that they were conducting in-
ternal assessments to ensure compliance. The interviewee (a legal expert 
in fintech and blockchain) stated that there is still no clear regulation of 
blockchain in the UAE in any sector, let alone healthcare and, therefore, 
concerns exist with regard to implementing smart contracts. Another 
interviewee highlighted a concern about the lack of consumer data 
protection laws specific to blockchain in the UAE. The interview findings 
are in line with the World Economic Forum (2020) report on lessons 
learned from the 200+ active blockchain projects in the UAE, which 
stated that the main challenge to blockchain deployment is regulatory 
issues. This accords with the literature; governments are lagging in 
developing regulations to deal with technological innovations such as 
blockchain (Kimani et al., 2020). 


4.3.2. Innovation propensity 
In the UAE, significant efforts have been undertaken by governments 


to promote innovation, as it is one of the six pillars of the national 
agenda. For instance, the UAE launched the National Innovation Strat-
egy in 2014 and the National Strategy for Advanced Innovation in 2018. 
This was echoed in the interviews as well. According to a respondent 
from a government entity, blockchain is central to Dubai’s “Paperless 
Strategy,” which aims to build an integrated paper-free government 
framework by the year 2021 and, in the process, eliminate more than a 
billion pieces of paper used for government transactions, including 
healthcare, every year (Smart Dubai, 2020b). Similarly, Dubai aims to 
become the first city to be fully powered by blockchain (Smart Dubai, 
2020a). The establishment of the Global Blockchain Council is part of 


Table 3 
Key Blockchain Initiatives and Key Stakeholders in UAE healthcare.  


Initiative Description/Key 
Objectives 


Key Stakeholders 
involved 


References 


Enhance 
electronic 
health records 
(EHR) 


Application of 
Blockchain 
Technology to 
Electronic Health 
Records will benefit 
in collection and 
management of all 
patient information 
within UAE in the 
most secure and 
reliable way 


Hospital (NMC); 
Blockchain 
Solution Providers 
(GaurdTime and 
Du) 


(Du, 2017;  
US-UAE 
Business 
Council, 
2018) 


Sheryan smart 
licensing 
system 


Deploy blockchain 
technology-based 
smart licensing 
system for licensing 
healthcare 
professionals looking 
to work in the UAE 
from anywhere in the 
world. 


Government (The 
Dubai Health 
Authority and 
Dubai Healthcare 
City Authority); 
Customers 
(doctors, nurses, 
pharmacists, and 
technicians) 


(Dubai 
Health 
Authority, 
2018) 


Healthcare 
assessment 
system 


Deploy blockchain- 
based system to save 
and share assessment 
information of health 
professionals with 
local licensing health 
authorities. 


Government 
(Ministry of Health 
and Prevention); 
Customers 
(doctors, 
pharmacists, and 
technicians) 


(MOHAP, 
2019) 


Patient Safety 
solution 


UAE’s first patients’ 
blockchain-powered 
safety solution will 
make it easier for 
patients and 
healthcare providers 
to verify the 
authenticity as well as 
the conditions of 
medicines. 


Blockchain 
Solution Provider 
(Du); Healthcare 
Solution Provider 
(Dhonor 
HealthTech) 


(Zawya, 
2019) 


Hayat donor 
registry 


The blockchain 
solution is intended at 
improving and 
securing organ 
donation. The 
platform will be used 
to register donors’ 
pledge to donate 
organs. 


Government 
(Ministry of Health 
and Prevention); 
Customers (donors 
and receivers) 


World 
Economic 
Forum 
(2020) 


Blockchain-based 
platform for 
storing 
healthcare 
sector data 


It is UAE’s first 
advanced digital 
platform to store the 
data for health, 
pharmaceutical 
government and 
private facilities, 
health practitioners, 
and drug information. 


Government 
(Ministry of Health 
and Prevention; 
Dubai Healthcare 
City); Business 
Entities (hospitals, 
clinics, 
pharmacies, and 
laboratories) 


WAM (2020) 


Health and 
Wellness – 4P 
Solution 


It’s a UAE based 
health-tech startup 
company that utilizes 
a blockchain platform 
in 4P healthcare: 
Predictive, 
Preventive, 
Personalized, and 
Participatory. It 
captures vital health 
parameters to create 
personalized 
prevention programs 
for individuals, as 
well as to detect and 
monitor community 
and population health 
data. 


Blockchain 
Solution Provider 
(BodyO); 
Customers (general 
public) 


DIFC (2019)  


Table 3 (continued ) 


Initiative Description/Key 
Objectives 


Key Stakeholders 
involved 


References 


Contactless IRIS 
identification 
technology 


It’s a UAE based 
health-tech startup 
company that utilizes 
blockchain and 
biometrics-powered 
patient identification 
platform for 
contactless IRIS 
identification 
technology for secure 
and reliable patient 
data. 


Blockchain 
Solution Provider 
(Liber Health); 
Healthcare 
Providers 


Emirates 24/ 
7 (2020)  


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


11


the UAE government’s efforts to enhance UAE’s position as a leading 
center for innovation and knowledge economy (DMCC, 2020). In line 
with national innovation strategies, the Ministry of Health and Pre-
vention (MOHAP) has its own Innovation Health Strategy, the goals of 
which include creating advanced technology-based healthcare solutions 
(MOHAP, 2020). This innovation propensity of MOHAP has culminated 
in several blockchain projects (Table 3). In the private sector, the pro-
portion of SMEs investing in one or more innovation projects has almost 
doubled, from 29% in 2013 to 54% in 2019 (Dubai SME, 2019). 
Blockchain solution providers, especially large multinational providers 
such as IBM and Microsoft, are very innovative by nature, and therefore 
we expect to see more innovative blockchain proofs-of-concept and 
projects in the near future. 


4.3.3. Privacy and trust 
Building trust among stakeholders is critical for the adoption of 


blockchain technologies. Overall, considerable progress has been made 
by the UAE government and business entities in enhancing the privacy 
and trust of all stakeholders, especially customers. One interviewee 
highlighted the initiative of the Dubai Health Authority in implementing 
a smart contract that gives patients full control and ownership in 
approving the disclosure of their medical information to any 
stakeholder. 


Despite progress, privacy and trust remain a concern in the UAE since 
the regulatory framework is at a nascent stage. This was echoed in the 
interviews. According to the government respondent, patient privacy is 
the main challenge for blockchain in the healthcare sector. Another 
concern highlighted by respondents (from a blockchain solution pro-
vider) is the lack of secure internet servers in the country as most data 
are hosted on third-party servers of blockchain solution providers in 
other countries. This was not surprising given the UAE’s relatively low 
ranking (59th) for “secure internet servers” in a global network readi-
ness index survey (Network readiness index, 2019). 


One interviewee (chief technology architect in a multinational hos-
pital) mentioned the challenge in ensuring the security of patient data 
hosted in the blockchain. He said that if a patient has a chronic or ter-
minal illness, they may not want everyone to see that they have this 
health problem. It is their responsibility as healthcare providers to 
ensure that patient data are not misused, especially given that it is 
immutable. One legal expert mentioned the lack of clarity regarding the 
patient’s right to have their data erased (“right to be forgotten”), in 
accordance with GDPR. 


Customers expressed even greater concerns. Customer interviewees 
explicitly expressed fears over “who gets access” to view their health 
data and “whether patient consent will be sought.” A main concern for 
respondents was that governments and businesses could indirectly 
coerce their consent or make it mandatory for issuing visas or making 
job offers. Respondents mentioned that immutability would lead to 
more stringent audits and security checks on health conditions. In the 
words of an interviewee, “private healthcare consultations, especially 
with psychologists and psychiatrists, can be used against the patient, for 
example, in hiring decisions.” Another mentioned that “patients who 
had a history of addictions and chronic illness could be disadvantaged, 
as it could affect their employment status or even their legal residence 
status in the country.” In sum, once a customer understood what 
blockchain is and how it works, concerns related to privacy and trust 
outweighed the benefits. They expressed the desire for complete control 
over what goes into the blockchain as immutable data as well as their 
voluntary consent (without any compulsion) regarding who is able to 
view the data. 


4.3.4. Supporting infrastructure 
It was evident in this research that the UAE, especially during the 


past decade, has invested significantly in establishing a robust infra-
structure to become a global leader in the adoption of the latest tech-
nologies and to develop a robust healthcare sector. Expert interviewees 


generally expressed satisfaction with the supporting infrastructure for 
blockchain adoption. According to one, the UAE government’s liberal 
policies in attracting foreign investment, especially from developed 
countries, in the healthcare sector, will facilitate technology transfer, 
including blockchain technologies. 


In addition, interviewees highlighted the role of tech startups and 
universities in promoting blockchain. It is encouraging to see the UAE 
government actively supporting tech startups through startup in-
cubators and accelerators. For instance, the Dubai International Finan-
cial Centre’s startup accelerator program is supporting six startup 
companies in blockchain, including one in healthcare. Similarly, in5 is a 
startup incubator based in Dubai, supporting several blockchain start-
ups, including in healthcare (in5, 2020). UAE universities and global 
consulting firms have started offering training and certification pro-
grams in blockchain technologies, which will enhance the blockchain 
ecosystem. From a consumer perspective, access to 4 G/5 G internet 
encourages the use of blockchain applications. Also, the UAE is among 
the countries with the highest per capita income, and customers thus 
have access to digital devices such as smartphones and laptops to sup-
port blockchain adoption. 


5. Discussion 


The validity of a framework is established qualitatively if the con-
structs and categories, explanations, and interpretations of the frame-
work make sense. Specifically, findings should meet most of the 
requirements of framework validity such as credibility, transferability, 
dependability, confirmability, fairness, and authenticity to improve 
understanding, stimulate action, and empower action (Creswell and 
Miller, 2000). 


Table 4 summarizes the blockchain readiness assessment findings for 
the UAE healthcare sector. It provides a snapshot of key findings related 
to the various components of the readiness framework. We were able to 
clearly organize the case study findings as per the components of the 
framework and provide adequate explanations regarding the blockchain 
readiness of the sector. A categorization of “Low,” “Moderate,” and 
“High” was used to summarize individual stakeholder readiness (gov-
ernments, business entities, solution providers, and customers) and their 
collaboration readiness. The same categorization was used to capture 
the facilitating conditions influencing the readiness of stakeholders. The 
categorization provides a simple, generic understanding of blockchain 
readiness for relevant practitioners and policymakers devising policies 
and support mechanisms to address readiness-related differences. 


The findings demonstrate the strong readiness of the UAE govern-
ment in all four readiness dimensions. They affirm that the government 
is the most important stakeholder for driving blockchain initiatives and 
that they play multiple roles such as enablers, adopters, and regulators. 
However, the relatively low readiness of business entities, especially 
SMEs, in motivational and engagement readiness is a concern because 
over 90% of the firms in the UAE (and globally) are SMEs. If blockchain 
adoption is not inclusive, it will enhance the digital divide between 
SMEs and large firms, creating new inequalities or reinforcing existing 
ones. More support, education, and awareness are required to improve 
their engagement in blockchain projects. The successful use cases of 
SME blockchain projects will provide an impetus for other SMEs to 
explore blockchain solutions. Larger firms showed a greater propensity 
toward blockchain technologies and appeared to be in a much better 
position to leverage opportunities afforded by the technology. 


The moderate to high readiness of blockchain solution providers 
across the four dimensions is encouraging, though their focus on 
healthcare is comparatively smaller vis-à-vis other sectors. Furthermore, 
the majority of blockchain solution providers are large non-domestic 
multinational firms. To promote local solution providers and startups, 
policymakers and industry groups could facilitate diffusion of innova-
tion through collaborative partnerships such as international joint 
ventures and/or by non-domestic firms mentoring local firms and 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


12


Table 4 
Summary of Blockchain Readiness Assessment of UAE healthcare.  


Readiness  Government Business Entities Blockchain Solution Providers Customers 


Individual Stakeholder Readiness 
Motivational 


Readiness 
→ High 


• UAE Vision 2021 aims to achieve a world- 
class healthcare sector 
• Dubai’s healthcare strategy aims to 
transform Dubai into a leading healthcare 
destination 
• Abu Dhabi Healthcare Strategic Plan seeks 
to improve the quality of healthcare 
services, patient safety, and experience as 
well as develop an e-health program 


Low 
• In general, firms, especially 
SMEs, are not up-to-date 
with key contemporary 
technologies and trends 
• Many small firms have not 
heard of “blockchain.” 


Moderate to High 
• Solution providers and consulting 
firms are trying to change the status 
quo of business entities regarding 
blockchain implementation 
• Focus on healthcare solutions is 
still limited 


High 
• Customers want to see 
improvements in existing 
practices/services 
• Dissatisfaction with long 
waiting times, improper 
diagnosis, data entry errors, and 
importantly, interoperability 


Engagement 
Readiness 


→ High 
• Launch of UAE Blockchain Strategy 2021 
• Launch of Dubai Blockchain Strategy 
• Establishment of Global Blockchain 
Council 


Low 
• Lack of knowledge and 
awareness  
• Lack of clarity on 
regulatory issues 


Moderate to High 
• More than 120 blockchain 
companies in the UAE 
• Several blockchain start-ups 
• More than 200 active projects but 
few in healthcare 
• Healthcare-specific blockchain 
firms are limited 


High 
• Keen awareness of and 
willingness to engage with 
blockchain technologies 
• The desire for supply chain 
traceability of medicines/ 
products and country of origin 


Technical 
Readiness 


→ High 
Leverage technological innovation through 
the Smart Dubai 2021 initiative 
Exploit disruptive innovation through Dubai 
10X initiative to be ten years ahead of other 
world cities 
Ranked first in the world in government 
procurement of advanced technology 
products 


Moderate to High 
• Most firms use the latest 
ICTs 


Moderate to High 
• All major global blockchain 
providers are active in the UAE (e. 
g., Microsoft, SAP, IBM, Amazon, 
etc.) 
• Support for start-ups 
• Availability of wireless and cloud 
infrastructure, faster connectivity, 
and higher bandwidth 
• Set to leverage 5 G networks 


High 
• Availability of technological 
resources such as smart devices, 
computers, tablets, and 
smartphones 
• Availability of mobile and home 
internet for anytime and 
anywhere access to health records 
and services 


Structural 
Readiness 


→ High 
The government is the biggest spender in the 
healthcare sector at approximately USD 10 
billion 
The strategic partnership between Abu 
Dhabi Health Services Company and 
LinkedIn 


Moderate to High 
• A significant increase in IT 
budget among firms  
• Most firms have dedicated 
IT budgets 


Moderate to High 
• All major global blockchain 
providers have strong financial and 
human resource backing as well as 
worldwide R&D divisions 
• Healthcare division is lacking in 
most major firms 


High 
• High per-capita income to 
afford the technology 
• Strong familiarity and expertise 
in using various technologies 


Stakeholder Collaboration Readiness 
Government ↔ Moderate to High 


• Evidence of cooperation/ collaboration 
between different government entities (e.g., 
Dubai Health Authority and Dubai 
Healthcare City Authority; Ministry of 
Health and Prevention and Dubai 
Healthcare City) 


Low 
• Only evidenced for a 
blockchain-based platform 
for storing healthcare sector 
data 


Low 
• No direct evidence from the case 
study 


High 
• Evidence of direct collaboration 
(e.g., Sheryan smart licensing 
system; Healthcare assessment 
system; Hayat donor registry) 


Business Entities ↔ – Low 
• No direct evidence from the 
case study 


Moderate to High 
• Evidence of collaboration 
witnessed (e.g., for electronic 
health records and contactless IRIS 
identification technology) 


Low 
• No direct evidence from the case 
study 


Blockchain 
Solution 
Providers 


↔ – – Moderate to High 
• Evidence of collaboration 
witnessed (e.g., for EHRs and 
patient safety solution) 


Low 
• Only evidenced for BodyO, the 
health-tech startup firm 


Customers ↔ – – – Low 
• No direct evidence from the case 
study 


Facilitating Conditions Readiness 
Regulatory and 


Legal 
→ Low 


• Launch of Dubai Blockchain Policy is 
promising, but there is no federal-level 
blockchain policy and regulation 
• Blockchain considered under the legal 
framework of cryptocurrencies 


Low 
• High stakeholder concerns related to blockchain regulatory and legal environment 
• Concerns related to the validity of smart contracts 
• The regulatory issue emerged as the top challenge in the World Economic Forum report on UAE 
blockchain projects 


Innovation 
Propensity 


→ High 
• Innovation is one of the six pillars of the 
UAE national agenda 
• Established the National Innovation 
Strategy in 2014 
• Launched National Strategy for Advanced 
Innovation in 2018 
• Dubai government’s Paperless Strategy 
2021 
• Launch of Center for Fourth Industrial 


Moderate 
• Large firms found to be 
more innovative than small 
firms 
• SME innovation almost 
doubled from 29% in 2013 to 
54% in 2019. 


Moderate to High 
• Most large multinational 
blockchain providers such as IBM, 
Microsoft, Amazon have high 
innovation propensity 
• Limited evidence regarding small 
and medium blockchain providers 
• Few blockchain start-ups in 
healthcare are very innovative (e. 
g., Body0, Liber Health) 


Moderate to High 
• Customers, in general, have 
demonstrated innovation 
propensity in using smart devices, 
smart payments gateways, etc. 


(continued on next page) 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


13


startups (Balasubramanian and Shukla, 2020). The relatively high 
customer readiness across all four dimensions is encouraging, given that 
their willingness and ability to participate in the blockchain ecosystem 
are critical to its widespread adoption. 


Regarding stakeholder collaboration readiness, government entities 
have shown strong readiness to collaborate with other government en-
tities. Unfortunately, only limited evidence of public-private partner-
ships, multi-stakeholder consortium projects, and international 
collaboration was available. Enhancing government collaboration with 
business entities and blockchain solution providers is critical to facili-
tating complementary knowledge and skill acquisition for innovative 
blockchain solutions. However, it was encouraging to identify several 
customer-centric blockchain projects initiated by public sector entities. 
This shows that the UAE public sector is responding to recommendations 
in the literature to implement patient/customer-centric blockchain so-
lutions (Dimitrov, 2019; Siyal et al., 2019). Overall, difficulty in 
bringing different stakeholders to the table for blockchain initiatives 
remains the topmost challenge for blockchain adoption. This is in line 
with previous findings that intra- and inter-stakeholder collaboration 
issues are a significant barrier to blockchain adoption in the healthcare 
sector (Dhagarra et al., 2019). 


In terms of facilitating conditions, customer concerns related to 
privacy and trust remain a prominent issue requiring immediate atten-
tion. The evidence points to a need for customer-first, privacy-first 
blockchain solutions that give customers full ownership and control over 
their data. The general public should also clearly see the full benefits of 
participation, especially solutions with the potential to positively impact 
people’s lives. Hence, educating and creating awareness of the benefits 
of blockchain and addressing concerns regarding privacy and trust are 
critical for public participation. Similarly, addressing the privacy and 
trust concerns of business entities and blockchain providers, such as 
those related to secure internet servers and GDPR, is important. In 
response, the UAE government is making efforts to increase the number 
of local servers. Leading blockchain solution providers such as IBM, 
Microsoft, and Amazon have recently opened state-of-the-art data cen-
ters in the UAE to support their blockchain and cloud solutions (The 
National, 2020). The UAE Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution is 
working with key stakeholders in the healthcare and public sectors to co- 
develop consent and data privacy frameworks to protect patient data 
(C4IR, 2020). 


Lack of clarity on blockchain regulations and laws such as those 
regarding consumer data protection and the legal validity of smart 
contracts are pressing concerns holding back firms from implementing 
blockchain solutions (Kimani et al., 2020). For example, tensions sur-
rounding whether data should be mutable or erasable should be 
addressed upfront before any blockchain solutions are implemented. 
From a regulatory and legal perspective, it is important that appropriate 
policy measures are in place to enable individuals and businesses to 
benefit from blockchain technologies. However, a balancing act is 


required when developing the policy framework, which should be 
neither too restrictive nor too lax. It should be capable of supporting the 
appetite for innovation of the sector and the country but not compromise 
on the potential downside/unknown risks of the new technology, 
thereby protecting the interests of all stakeholders. Previous studies 
have highlighted that unregulated innovations might pose hazards in the 
conduct of business (Kimani et al., 2020). 


A strong readiness to innovation was witnessed across stakeholders, 
with the public sector leading the way in promoting an innovative cul-
ture in the UAE. For example, public sector innovations such as 
“paperless Dubai” have paved the way for blockchain adoption. Simi-
larly, supportive and robust infrastructure such as ICT infrastructure and 
the establishment of free economic zones to attract outside firms and 
investors were found to have been critical in supporting the adoption of 
emerging technologies such as blockchain. The other key finding in 
terms of supporting infrastructure is the support extended to startups by 
governments and other stakeholders, such as with the establishment of 
innovation hubs and accelerators programs. These are vital to sustaining 
the growth of blockchain technologies. 


Overall, Table 4 confirms the validity of the framework. It shows that 
the framework is credible and can be applied in any research setting to 
assess the blockchain readiness of the healthcare sector. 


6. Conclusions 


Only a few years have passed since the world realized the disruptive 
potential of blockchain in areas other than cryptocurrencies. While an-
ecdotes and use cases about the impact of this technology abound, 
sectors and countries have shown varied readiness toward its adoption. 
Yet, no comprehensive evidence-based and structured approach has 
been made to understanding such readiness. A comprehensive, multi- 
dimensional blockchain readiness assessment framework with the po-
tential to be applied to any sector or country context was developed in 
this study. The usefulness and applicability of the framework was 
demonstrated in a real-life setting through a case study of the UAE 
healthcare sector. In the process, the authors answered several pressing 
research questions that have implications for the adoption of blockchain 
technologies. 


The implications of this study are manifold. For its research impli-
cations, the authors were able to identify and integrate various isolated 
components into an empirically tractable and meaningful readiness 
assessment framework. Key stakeholders, their extent of readiness, and 
their readiness to collaborate with other stakeholders were understood. 
The key facilitating conditions necessary for the widespread adoption of 
blockchain, such as infrastructure, privacy, trust, regulatory/legal as-
pects, and innovation propensity, were identified. This is the first 
investigation of blockchain in the UAE healthcare sector, and the find-
ings are, therefore, both novel and significant. 


In terms of practical implications, this research demonstrates that 


Table 4 (continued ) 


Readiness  Government Business Entities Blockchain Solution Providers Customers 


Revolution 
• Launch of Innovation Health Strategy 


Privacy and 
Trust 


→ Moderate 
• Most initiatives are in the planning phase 
such as consent and data privacy 
frameworks to protect patients’ data, and 
smart contract, which gives the patient the 
full control and ownership of their health 
data 


Low 
• Concerns related to the privacy of patient data 
• Lack of secure internet servers in the UAE 
• Lack of consumer data protection law specific to blockchain 
• Concerns related to the incompatibility of UAE blockchain 
regulations and GDPR 


Low 
• Strong concerns expressed by 
consumers related to the misuse 
of data by business and 
governments 


Supportive 
Infrastructure 


→ High 
• Established free zones to attract leading global healthcare providers 
• Strong support for startup incubators and accelerators 
• Availability of university programs, and training and certification programs in blockchain in the UAE 
• Robust IT infrastructure of the UAE 


High 
• Free Wi-Fi for public 
• Availability of Smart Kiosks 
• Internet and mobile coverage 
throughout the country 
• Availability of 5 G networks  


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     






Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


14


blockchain has enormous potential to transform the healthcare sector. 
From managing patient data to tracking drugs through the supply chain, 
blockchain could solve pressing problems in the industry. Moreover, the 
case study findings are relevant for other countries, especially for those 
that share a vision similar to the UAE—to become a global leader in 
providing world-class health services as well as be open to disruptive 
technologies such as blockchain. 


With regard to societal implications, we found both positive and 
negative implications. The positive implications include that blockchain 
can be effectively utilized in countering the problem of fake drugs and 
medical equipment, thereby saving lives. Patient-centric blockchain 
solutions have the potential to enhance precision medicine, biomedical 
research, genetic engineering, and other advancements. Importantly, 
individualized, life-long patient care data stored on the blockchain can 
be easily shared digitally. It also facilitates real-time and remote patient 
care, which is critical for many patients. Further, applications of 
blockchain such as smart contracts help reduce the use of paper, related 
travel, and couriers, thereby supporting the environment. However, 
data-related privacy and security are some of the societal concerns 
surrounding blockchain. Many patients wish to keep their treatment 
private, and concerns/fears related to who has access to their health data 
and whether it will be misused need to be addressed. 


The study has some limitations. Although the proposed framework 
was developed based on an extensive review, it may not cover every 
facet critical for blockchain adoption. Furthermore, the application of 
the framework was tested only in one sector in a single country, and it 
was demonstrated through a predominantly qualitative approach, and 
therefore a statistical/quantitative precision validating the framework is 
missing. Finally, though the results are generalized for business entities, 
insights were obtained mostly from hospitals/clinics. Given that several 
other entities come under the umbrella of “business entities” in the 
framework, such as pharmacies, insurance providers, health research 
centers, drug and equipment manufacturing companies, among others, 
more in-depth investigation is required to delineate the nuances in the 
readiness of various entities. 


For future research, given the conceptual comprehensiveness and 
generic nature of the framework, researchers in different industrial 
settings could adapt and use the framework in their respective contexts; 
healthcare represents a myriad of sectors, such as manufacturing (drug 
and medical equipment), services (e.g., insurance, ambulatory trans-
portation) and research and development (e.g., clinical trials, laboratory 
experiments). Its potential applicability to other sectors is therefore 
high, provided that they are carefully designed and contextualized. 
Furthermore, future research could apply more rigor in their primary 
investigation and potentially conduct a large-scale survey–based study 
to test the statistical appropriateness and generalizability of the frame-
work in different settings. Moreover, given that blockchain in healthcare 
is a relatively new and promising domain, future studies could attempt 
to strengthen the proposed framework through refinement and valida-
tion across countries and test its usefulness and applicability in different 
settings and sectors. 


Despite these limitations, we believe that the proposed framework 
and its successful application will significantly enhance understanding 
of blockchain in the healthcare sector. We anticipate that this study will 
encourage more research on blockchain in healthcare and other in-
dustries and will contribute to theoretical advancement in the field. 


References 


Ahmed, E., Shabani, M., 2019. DNA data marketplace: an analysis of the ethical concerns 
regarding the participation of the individuals. Front. Genet. 10, 1–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fgene.2019.01107. 


Albahli, S., Khan, R.U., Qamar, A.M., 2020. A blockchain-based architecture for smart 
healthcare system: a case study of Saudi Arabia. Adv. Sci. Technol. Eng. Syst. J. 5 (1), 
40–47. https://doi.org/10.25046/aj050106. 


Balasubramanian, S., Shukla, V., 2020. Foreign versus local firms: implications for 
environmental sustainability. Benchmarking 7 (5), 1739–1768. https://doi.org/ 
10.1108/BIJ-12-2019-0526. 


Bell, L., Buchanan, W.J., Cameron, J., Lo, O., 2018. Applications of blockchain within 
healthcare. Blockchain Healthcare Today 1, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.30953/bhty. 
v1.8. 


Bio World, 2020. Blockchain adoption could help in COVID-19 fight. https://www. 
bioworld.com/articles/435042-blockchain-adoption-could-help-in-covid-19-fight 
(Accessed 02 June 2020). 


C4IR, 2020. United Arab Emirates Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution https:// 
c4ir.ae/portfolios/ (Accessed 06 June 2020.  


Carter, C.R., Easton, L.P., 2011. Sustainable supply chain management: evolution and 
future directions. Int. J. Phys. Distribut. Logistics Manag. 41 (1), 46–62. https://doi. 
org/10.1108/09600031111101420. 


Casino, F., Dasaklis, T.K., Patsakis, C., 2019. A systematic literature review of 
blockchain-based applications: current status, classification and open issues. 
Telematics Inf. 36, 55–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.11.006. 


Chukwu, E., Garg, L., 2020. A systematic review of blockchain in healthcare: 
frameworks, prototypes, and implementations. IEEE Access 8, 21196–21214. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2969881. 


Clohessy, T., Acton, T., 2019. Investigating the influence of organizational factors on 
blockchain adoption. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 119 (7), 1457–1491. https://doi.org/ 
10.1108/IMDS-08-2018-0365. 


Colicchio, C., Giovanoli, C., Grivas, S.G., 2015. A cloud readiness assessment framework 
for enterprise content management and social software (E-Collaboration) in small 
and medium sized enterprises. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Enterprise Systems, IEEE, pp. 177–183. doi: 10.1109/ES.2015.24. 


Creswell, J.W., Miller, D.L., 2000. Determining validity in qualitative inquiry. Theory 
Pract. 39 (3), 124–130. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip3903_2. 


De Aguiar, E.J., Faiçal, B.S., Krishnamachari, B., Ueyama, J., 2020. A survey of 
blockchain-based strategies for healthcare. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 53 (2), 1–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3376915. 


Deloitte, 2020. Blockchain Services and Solutions https://www2.deloitte.com/ru/en/ 
pages/consulting/solutions/blockchain-services-and-solutions.html (Accessed 08 
June 2020.  


Dhagarra, D., Goswami, M., Sarma, P.R.S., Choudhury, A., 2019. Big Data and 
blockchain supported conceptual model for enhanced healthcare coverage. Bus. 
Process Manag. J. 25 (7), 1612–1632. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-06-2018- 
0164. 


Dimitrov, D.V., 2019. Blockchain applications for healthcare data management. Healthc 
Inform. Res. 25 (1), 51–56. https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2019.25.1.51. 


DU, 2017. Du Partners With NMC Hospital to Revolutionize Electronic Health Records 
with Blockchain Technology for 100% Data Security https://www.du.ae/about/ 
media-centre/newsdetail/du%20partners%20with%20NMC%20Hospital%20to% 
20revolutionize%20Electronic%20Health (Accessed 30 May 2020).  


DMCC, 2020. Global Blockchain Council. https://www.dmcc.ae/about-us/global-bloc 
kchain-council. Accessed 18 June 2020.  


Dubai Health Authority, 2018. The Dubai Health Authority and Dubai Healthcare City 
Authority Sign MoU to Link License Data of Health Professionals Using Blockchain 
https://www.dha.gov.ae/en/DHANews/Pages/DHANews1538378411-21-10-2018. 
aspx (Accessed 30 May 2020.  


Dubai SME, 2019. The State of Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in Dubai. https:// 
sme.ae/SME_File/Files/SME%20REPORT%202019.pdf. Accessed 05 June 2020.  


FDA DSCSA, 2020. Blockchain Interoperability Pilot Project Report.. https://www.ibm. 
com/downloads/cas/9V2LRYG5. Accessed 16 June 2020.  


Gassner, U.M., 2018. Blockchain in EU E-health–blocked by the barrier of data 
protection? Compliance Elliance J. 4 (2), 3–20. https://ul.qucosa.de/api/qucosa% 
3A32043/attachment/ATT-0/. Accessed 28 May 2020.  


George, D., Wani, A., Bhatia, A., 2019. A Blockchain based Solution to Know Your 
Customer (KYC) Dilemma. In Proceedings of 2019 IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), IEEE, pp. 1–6. doi: 
10.1109/ANTS47819.2019.9118042. 


Giancaspro, M., 2017. Is a ‘smart contract’ really a smart idea? Insights from a legal 
perspective. Computer law & security review 33 (6), 825–835. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.clsr.2017.05.007. 


IBM, 2020. IBM Rapid Supplier Connect: Emergency Supplier Onboarding and Inventory 
Availability. https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/solutions/rapid-supplier-connect. 
Accessed 20 June 2020.  


in5, 2020. An Enabling Platform for Entrepreneurs and Start-ups https://infive.ae/ 
(Accessed 20 June 2020).  


IPSOS, 2019. Global Citizens & Data Privacy. https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/ 
files/ct/news/documents/2019-01/ipsos-wef_-_global_consumer_views_on_data_ 
privacy_-_2019-01-25-final.pptx_lecture_seule_0.pdf (Accessed 10 June 2020). 


Islam, A.N., Mäntymäki, M., Turunen, M., 2019. Why do blockchains split? An actor- 
network perspective on Bitcoin splits. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 148, 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119743. 


Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., Arha, H., 2019. Understanding the Blockchain technology 
adoption in supply chains-Indian context. Int. J. Prod. Res. 57 (7), 2009–2033. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1518610. 


Katuwal, G.J., Pandey, S., Hennessey, M., Lamichhane, B., 2018. Applications of 
Blockchain in Healthcare: Current Landscape & Challenges. https://arxiv.org/abs/1 
812.02776. Accessed 28 May 2020.  


Khatoon, A., 2020. A blockchain-based smart contract system for healthcare 
management. Electronics (Basel) 9 (94), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
electronics9010094. 


Kiberu, V.M., Mars, M., Scott, R.E., 2019. Development of an evidence-based e-health 
readiness assessment framework for Uganda. Health Inf. Manag. J. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1833358319839253. 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     



https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.01107

https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.01107

https://doi.org/10.25046/aj050106

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2019-0526

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2019-0526

https://doi.org/10.30953/bhty.v1.8

https://doi.org/10.30953/bhty.v1.8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0006

https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031111101420

https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031111101420

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.11.006

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2969881

https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-08-2018-0365

https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-08-2018-0365

https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip3903_2

https://doi.org/10.1145/3376915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0014

https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-06-2018-0164

https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-06-2018-0164

https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2019.25.1.51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0018

https://www.dmcc.ae/about-us/global-blockchain-council

https://www.dmcc.ae/about-us/global-blockchain-council

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0020

https://sme.ae/SME_File/Files/SME%20REPORT%202019.pdf

https://sme.ae/SME_File/Files/SME%20REPORT%202019.pdf

https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/9V2LRYG5

https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/9V2LRYG5

https://ul.qucosa.de/api/qucosa%3A32043/attachment/ATT-0/

https://ul.qucosa.de/api/qucosa%3A32043/attachment/ATT-0/

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.05.007

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.05.007

https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/solutions/rapid-supplier-connect

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0028

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0028

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119743

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1518610

https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02776

https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02776

https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9010094

https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9010094

https://doi.org/10.1177/1833358319839253

https://doi.org/10.1177/1833358319839253




Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


15


Kimani, D., Adams, K., Attah-Boakye, R., Ullah, S., Frecknall-Hughes, J., Kim, J., 2020. 
Blockchain, business and the fourth industrial revolution: whence, whither, 
wherefore and how. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 161, 1–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120254. 


Kuo, T.T., Kim, H.E., Ohno-Machado, L., 2017. Blockchain distributed ledger 
technologies for biomedical and health care applications. J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 24 
(6), 1211–1220. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocx068. 


Li, J., Ray, P., Seale, H., MacIntyre, R., 2012. An E-Health readiness assessment 
framework for public health services–Pandemic perspective. In Proceedings of 45th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, pp. 2800–2809. doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2012.95. 


Mackey, T.K., Kuo, T.T., Gummadi, B., Clauson, K.A., Church, G., Grishin, D., Obbad, K., 
Barkovich, R., Palombini, M., 2019. ‘Fit-for-purpose?’–challenges and opportunities 
for applications of blockchain technology in the future of healthcare. BMC Med. 17 
(68), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1296-7. 


Malanga, D.F., Kamanga, B.C., 2019. E-records readiness at Karonga District Council in 
Malawi: applying IRMT e-Records readiness assessment framework. Inf. Dev. 35 (3), 
482–491. https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666918766971. 


Marsal-Llacuna, M.L., 2017. Future living framework: is blockchain the next enabling 
network? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 128, 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2017.12.005. 


McGhin, T., Choo, K.K.R., Liu, C.Z., He, D., 2019. Blockchain in healthcare applications: 
research challenges and opportunities. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 135, 62–75. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.02.027. 


Mettler, M., 2016. Blockchain technology in healthcare: the revolution starts here. In 
Proceedings of 18th international conference on e-health networking, applications 
and services (Healthcom), IEEE, pp. 1–3. doi: 10.1109/HealthCom.2016.7749510. 


Mipasa, 2020. Together On the Path from Data to Action. https://app.mipasa.org/. 
Accessed 26 June 2020.  


MOHAP, 2019. Ministry of Health and Prevention launches the first blockchain-based 
system. https://www.mohap.gov.ae/en/MediaCenter/News/Pages/2184.aspx 
(Accessed 25 May 2020). 


MOHAP, 2020. Innovation Health Strategy. https://www.mohap.gov.ae/en/Aboutus/Pa 
ges/InnovationHealthStrategy.aspx (Accessed 25 May 2020). 


Network Readiness Index, 2019. The Network Readiness Index 2019: Towards a Future- 
Ready Society. https://networkreadinessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ 
The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-version-March-2020-2.pdf. Accessed 28 
May 2020.  


Nugent, T., Upton, D., Cimpoesu, M., 2016. Improving Data Transparency in Clinical 
Trials Using Blockchain Smart contracts. F1000Research 5, 2541. https://doi.org/ 
10.12688/f1000research.9756.1. 


Onik, M.M.H., Aich, S., Yang, J., Kim, C.S., Kim, H.C., 2019. Blockchain in healthcare: 
challenges and solutions. Big Data Analytics For Intelligent Healthcare Management, 
197-226. Academic Press, Cambridge, MA. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12- 
818146-1.00008-8.  


Ozturan, M., Atasu, I., Soydan, H., 2019. Assessment of Blockchain Technology 
Readiness Level of Banking Industry: case of Turkey. Int. J. Bus. Market. Manag. 4 
(12), 1–13. 


Patel, V., 2019. A framework for secure and decentralized sharing of medical imaging 
data via blockchain consensus. Health Informatics J. 25 (4), 1398–1411. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1460458218769699. 


Pólvora, A., Nascimento, S., Lourenço, J.S., Scapolo, F., 2020. Blockchain for industrial 
transformations: a forward-looking approach with multi-stakeholder engagement for 
policy advice. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 157, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2020.120091. 


PR Newswire, 2018. EpigenCare’s Personalized Skincare Test Brings Epigenetics Closer 
to Consumer Applications. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/epige 
ncares-personalized-skincare-test-brings-epigenetics-closer-to-consumer-applicati 
ons-300614426.html. Accessed 21 May 2020.  


Przhedetskiy, Y.V., Przhedetskaya, N.V., Borzenko, K.V., Bondarenko, V.A., 2019. 
Blockchain technologies in healthcare institutions: focus on security and effective 
cooperation with the government. Int. J. Econ. Bus. Admin. 7 (2), 92–99. htt 
ps://www.ijeba.com/journal/373/download. Accessed 26 May 2020.  


PwC, 2019. Establishing Blockchain Policy-Strategies For the Governance of Distributed 
Ledger Technology Ecosystems. https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/docu 
ments/establishing-blockchain-policy-pwc.pdf. Accessed 28 May 2020.  


Radanović, I., Likić, R., 2018. Opportunities for use of blockchain technology in 
medicine. Appl. Health Econ. Health Policy 16, 583–590. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s40258-018-0412-8. 


Razmi, J., Sangari, M.S., Ghodsi, R., 2009. Developing a practical framework for ERP 
readiness assessment using fuzzy analytic network process. Adv. Eng. Softw. 40 (11), 
1168–1178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2009.05.002. 


Reuters, 2019. Aetna, Other Health Insurers Team Up With IBM On Blockchain Project 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-insurers-blockchain/aetna-other-health- 
insurers-team-up-with-ibm-on-blockchain-project-idUSKCN1PI2K0 (Accessed 18 
May 2020.  


Rezai-Rad, M., Vaezi, R., Nattagh, F., 2012. E-health readiness assessment framework in 
Iran. Iran. J. Public Health 41 (10), 43–51. 


Shareef, M., Ojo, A., Janowski, T., 2008. A readiness assessment framework for e- 
government planning: design and application. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
international Conference on theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, ACM, pp. 
403–410. doi: 10.1145/1509096.1509180. 


Siyal, A.A., Junejo, A.Z., Zawish, M., Ahmed, K., Khalil, A., Soursou, G., 2019. 
Applications of blockchain technology in medicine and healthcare: challenges and 
future perspectives. Cryptography 3 (3), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cryptography3010003. 


Smart Dubai, 2020a. Blockchain. https://www.smartdubai.ae/initiatives/blockchain. 
Accessed 21 June 2020.  


Smart Dubai, 2020b. Paperless. https://www.smartdubai.ae/initiatives/paperless. 
Accessed 21 June 2020).  


Tandon, A., Dhir, A., Islam, N., Mäntymäki, M., 2020. Blockchain in healthcare: a 
systematic literature review, synthesizing framework and future research agenda. 
Comput. Ind. 122, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103290, 103290.  


Tracxn, 2020. Top Emerging Blockchain Startups. https://tracxn.com/d/emerging-star 
tups/top-blockchain-startups-2020. Accessed 06 June 2020.  


UAE, 2020. Emirates Blockchain Strategy 2021 https://u.ae/en/about-the-uae/ 
strategies-initiatives-and-awards/federal-governments-strategies-and-plans/ 
emirates-blockchain-strategy-2021 (Accessed 24 May 2020.  


UAE Vision 2021, 2019. World-class Healthcare. https://www.vision2021.ae/en/natio 
nal-agenda-2021/list/world-class-circle (Accessed 26 May 2020).  


US-UAE Business Council, 2018. The UAE Healthcare Sector https://usuaebusiness.org/ 
wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Healthcare-Report-Final-January-2018-Update-1.pdf 
(Accessed 04 June 2020.  


Vlachos, A., Christodoulou, K., Iosif, E., 2019. An Algorithmic Blockchain Readiness 
Index. Proceedings 28 (4), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/proceedings2019028004. 


Wang, L., Luo, X.R., Lee, F., 2019. Unveiling the interplay between blockchain and 
loyalty program participation: a qualitative approach based on Bubichain. Int. J. Inf. 
Manage. 49, 397–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.001. 


Waxman, J.M., Faget, K., Daniels, B., 2019. Blockchain: a tool with a future in 
healthcare. Med. Econ. https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/blockchain-too 
l-future-healthcare Accessed 02 June 2020).  


White, R., Marinakis, Y., Islam, N., Walsh, S., 2020. Is Bitcoin a currency, a technology- 
based product, or something else? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 151, 119877. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119877. 


Windrum, P., 2008. Innovation and entrepreneurship in public services. Innovation in 
Public Sector services: Entrepreneurship, Creativity and Management. Edward Elgar 
Publishing, Northampton, MA, pp. 3–20. 


World Economic Forum, 2019. Inclusive Deployment of Blockchain for Supply Chains: 
part 1 – Introduction. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Introduction_to_Blo 
ckchain_for_Supply_Chains.pdf (Accessed 12 June 2020). 


World Economic Forum, 2020. Inclusive Deployment of Blockchain: case studies and 
learnings from the United Arab Emirates. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_I 
nclusive_Deployment_of_Blockchain_Case_Studies_and_Learnings_from_the_United_ 
Emirates.pdf (Accessed 12 June 2020). 


World Food Programme, 2017. Blockchain Against Hunger: Harnessing Technology in 
Support of Syrian Refugees. https://www.wfp.org/news/blockchain-against-hun 
ger-harnessing-technology-support-syrian-refugees. Accessed 26 May 2020.  


Yin, R.K., 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications Ltd, 
London.  


Yoon, H.J., 2019. Blockchain technology and healthcare. Healthc Inform. Res 25 (2), 
59–60. https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2019.25.2.59. 


Zawya, 2019. Du Announces Its First Health Blockchain Solution to Ensure Patient Safety 
in UAE https://www.zawya.com/mena/en/press-releases/story/du_announces_its_ 
first_health_blockchain_solution_to_ensure_Patient_Safety_in_UAE- 
ZAWYA20190115112842/ (Accessed 26 May 2020.   


Sreejith Balasubramanian is a Senior Lecturer in Supply 
Chain Management, and Chair of the Research Committee at 
Middlesex University, Dubai. He completed his PhD from 
Middlesex University Business School, London. His-areas of 
expertise include supply chain, operations management, 
disruptive technologies, sustainability, and knowledge man-
agement. His-work has been published in academic and 
practitioner-focused journals, including Supply Chain Manage-
ment: An International Journal, Production, Planning and Control, 
and Journal of Knowledge Management. He has been a consultant 
for several public and private sector entities, including the Abu 
Dhabi Chamber of Commerce and Bridgestone Middleseast.  


Vinaya Shukla is a Senior Lecturer in Operations and Supply 
Chain Management at Middlesex University Business School, 
London. He has a PhD from Cardiff Business School, UK. Prior 
to academia, he spent many years as a Management Consultant 
advising clients on how to improve their operations perfor-
mance. His-research interests are in Industry 4.0 and Block-
chain, supply chain sustainability, supply chain systems and 
supply chain risk management. He has published in several 
prestigious journals including the International Journal of Pro-
duction Economics, International Journal of Production Research, 
Supply Chain Management-An International Journal, Production 
Planning and Control, International Journal of Logistics Manage-
ment & Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management.  


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120254

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120254

https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocx068

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1296-7

https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666918766971

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.12.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.12.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.02.027

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.02.027

https://app.mipasa.org/

https://www.mohap.gov.ae/en/MediaCenter/News/Pages/2184.aspx

https://www.mohap.gov.ae/en/Aboutus/Pages/InnovationHealthStrategy.aspx

https://www.mohap.gov.ae/en/Aboutus/Pages/InnovationHealthStrategy.aspx

https://networkreadinessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-version-March-2020-2.pdf

https://networkreadinessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-version-March-2020-2.pdf

https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9756.1

https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9756.1

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818146-1.00008-8

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818146-1.00008-8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0050

https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458218769699

https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458218769699

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120091

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120091

https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/epigencares-personalized-skincare-test-brings-epigenetics-closer-to-consumer-applications-300614426.html

https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/epigencares-personalized-skincare-test-brings-epigenetics-closer-to-consumer-applications-300614426.html

https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/epigencares-personalized-skincare-test-brings-epigenetics-closer-to-consumer-applications-300614426.html

https://www.ijeba.com/journal/373/download

https://www.ijeba.com/journal/373/download

https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/documents/establishing-blockchain-policy-pwc.pdf

https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/documents/establishing-blockchain-policy-pwc.pdf

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40258-018-0412-8

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40258-018-0412-8

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2009.05.002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0059

https://doi.org/10.3390/cryptography3010003

https://doi.org/10.3390/cryptography3010003

https://www.smartdubai.ae/initiatives/blockchain

https://www.smartdubai.ae/initiatives/paperless

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103290

https://tracxn.com/d/emerging-startups/top-blockchain-startups-2020

https://tracxn.com/d/emerging-startups/top-blockchain-startups-2020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0067

https://www.vision2021.ae/en/national-agenda-2021/list/world-class-circle

https://www.vision2021.ae/en/national-agenda-2021/list/world-class-circle

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0069

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0069

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0069

https://doi.org/10.3390/proceedings2019028004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.001

https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/blockchain-tool-future-healthcare

https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/blockchain-tool-future-healthcare

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119877

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0075

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Introduction_to_Blockchain_for_Supply_Chains.pdf

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Introduction_to_Blockchain_for_Supply_Chains.pdf

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Inclusive_Deployment_of_Blockchain_Case_Studies_and_Learnings_from_the_United_Emirates.pdf

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Inclusive_Deployment_of_Blockchain_Case_Studies_and_Learnings_from_the_United_Emirates.pdf

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Inclusive_Deployment_of_Blockchain_Case_Studies_and_Learnings_from_the_United_Emirates.pdf

https://www.wfp.org/news/blockchain-against-hunger-harnessing-technology-support-syrian-refugees

https://www.wfp.org/news/blockchain-against-hunger-harnessing-technology-support-syrian-refugees

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0079

https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2019.25.2.59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31362-7/sbref0081




Technological Forecasting & Social Change 165 (2021) 120536


16


Jaspreet Singh Sethi is a Senior Lecturer in IT with the 
Computer Engineering and Informatics Department at Mid-
dlesex University Dubai. He holds a Masters in International 
Business and a Bachelors in Computer Science (Software 
Development) from the University of Wollongong. His- 
teaching expertise is in the area of Software/Web Develop-
ment, Information Systems, and Computer Networking. His- 
research interests are in the domain of Blockchain, Disruptive 
Technologies, Information Retrieval, and E-learning. Jaspreet 
is also involved in mentoring students on numerous industry- 
backed competitions and hackathons. He is also leading ini-
tiatives related to the adoption of technology within the 
Teaching and Learning committee at the university.  


Nazrul Islam is Associate Professor of Innovation/Entrepre-
neurship at the University of Exeter Business School, England, 
UK. He holds a PhD in innovation management. His-research 
interests include innovation in high-tech industries, the man-
agement of emerging and discontinuous innovations. His- 
research was published in the leading international journals 
and he has complemented his peer reviewed journal efforts 
with three books. Prof Islam’s research received awards 
including the ‘Brad Hosler Award for Outstanding Paper’ from 
USA; and the ‘Pratt & Whitney Canada Best Paper Award’ from 
Canada. Prof Islam serves on the board of directors for Business 
and Applied Sciences Academy of North America. He is 
currently an Associate Editor of Technological Forecasting & 
Social Change and Editor-in-Chief of International Journal of 
Technology Intelligence and Planning.  


Roy Saloum is a Service Delivery Manager with IBM and is 
affiliated with Middlesex University Dubai. With more than 12 
years of industrial IT experience, Roy has a wealth of trans-
ferable skills gained in infrastructure and data center man-
agement, cloud computing, and Blockchain. He holds an MSc in 
Business Information Systems Management from Middlesex 
University Dubai and a Bachelor’s degree from Wadi Interna-
tional University Syria & Otto-Von-Geurke University, Ger-
many. He has been able to reduce costs by implementing 
processes that are more efficient and repeatable and maxi-
mizing profits by analyzing trends and providing advice and 
guidance to junior colleagues. 


S. Balasubramanian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




