









Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


Please cite this article as: Vasco Sanchez Rodrigues, Industrial Marketing Management, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020


Available online 9 October 2020
0019-8501/© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


Research paper 


Measurement, mitigation and prevention of food waste in supply chains: An 
online shopping perspective 


Vasco Sanchez Rodrigues a,*, Emrah Demir a, Xun Wang a, Joseph Sarkis b 


a Logistics & Operations Management Section, Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, UK 
b Foisie Business School, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Massachusetts, USA   


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords: 
Online food retail supply chain 
Food waste management 
Natural resource based view 


A B S T R A C T   


This study introduces a framework and model, although applied in a practical setting, sets the stage for further 
theoretical development of mid-range theory. The methodology applied in the study has four main stages, 
namely interviews with managers from an online food retail supply chain, analysis of soft and hard data using 
questionnaire-based surveys of customers and suppliers, archival and factual information gathered from the 
supplier and the online food retailer to measure food waste across the supply chain and analytical models to 
quantify various effects. A number of propositions emerged from our multiple methodologies and observations. 
The major research contribution of this work is to advance Natural Resource Based View (NRBV) to the supply 
chain and various complexities involved in food waste management. Dynamic capabilities were clearly evident 
and necessary in rapidly changing industrial contexts such as online food supply chains. This paper also proposes 
a food waste minimization-and-mitigation model, establishes the direct and indirect outputs of food waste and 
brings attention of the food waste debate in the context of an exemplar online food supply chain, as well as 
provides a middle range theoretic framework to enhance understanding on theory and its application to this field 
informed mainly NRBV.   


1. Introduction 


Agricultural and food supply chains are central to nourishing the 
world’s population. Poverty relief while simultaneously limiting 
resource depletion and environmental burden is a sustainable supply 
chain management (SSCM) goal. They can benefit greatly from 
improved efficiency and waste reduction, addressing multiple sustain-
ability concerns. 


According to EU-27 stats published by the Independent in December, 
2015, the UK is the most wasteful of the EU’s 27 member states, need-
lessly throwing away 14.3 million tonnes per year. In the UK alone the 
annual amount of wasted food is worth approximately £13 billion with 
8.4 million people struggling to afford a meal (FAO, 2019). Food supply 
chains would appear third as an aggregated nation-level ranking of top 
waste emitters, only after the U.S. and China (WRI 2012). 


Given these issues, this study focuses on a UK grocery retail perish-
able food supply chain. The total estimate for UK post-farm gate food 
waste (2015) is 10.2 million tonnes; total household food waste is about 
7.1 million tonnes (WRAP, 2018). 


Food waste may be generated anywhere along the supply chain and 


has embedded environmental impacts (De Lange & Nahman, 2015)— 
such as water losses at the agricultural supplier level (Tsagatakis et al., 
2016) and carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions generated from food distri-
bution and decomposition (Kummu et al., 2012). Poor growth and 
harvesting practices in upstream supply chains lead to sizeable envi-
ronmental and resource waste (Davies & Legg, 2018). Poor demand 
management originating along the supply chain also contribute to food 
waste (Kiil, Dreyer, Hvolby, & Chabada, 2018; Kitinoja, Tokala, & 
Brondy, 2018). Inventory and supply chain practices for supply chain 
intermediaries, transporters, wholesalers, and distributors cause signif-
icant food waste burdens. This waste is also attributable to control and 
infrastructure concerns. Furthermore, wasteful food effluents occur in 
the downstream supply chain, retailing and customer stages. 


Electronic commerce—online presence and purchasing—has seen 
greater emphasis in food supply chains and grocery sales. Research on 
food waste and sustainability from online purchasing practices is very 
limited. Even with this increased importance of online grocery sales, 
little is known about food waste and sustainability externalities in an e- 
commerce context from practical, scholarly and theoretical perspec-
tives. This study contributes to knowledge in this area. It also provides 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Sanchezrodriguesva1@Cardiff.ac.uk (V.S. Rodrigues).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Industrial Marketing Management 


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020 
Received 16 May 2019; Received in revised form 20 August 2020; Accepted 30 September 2020   



mailto:Sanchezrodriguesva1@Cardiff.ac.uk

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00198501

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020




Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


2


opportunity for further expansion of sustainable supply chain manage-
ment research and theory in a rapidly nascent industrial setting. 


This study also aims to draw connections between food waste 
reduction practices and the Natural-Resource-Based View (NRBV) of the 
firm, specifically, by identifying and explaining relations among food 
waste reduction practices and the three NRBV capabilities – product 
stewardship, pollution prevention and clean technologies. NRBV is an 
important theoretical underpinning because NRBV stipulates that a 
firm’s success and competitive advantage depend on managing natural 
resources (Hart, 1995). This competitive advantage is embedded in the 
food waste reduction practices covered by the case study online grocery 
food supply chain. Food and its embedded environmental resources as 
they supply chains major natural resources. We expand NRBV focus to 
include supply chain entities and other stakeholders; we also take NRBV 
from a strategic theoretical perspective to include operational theoretic 
dimensions. 


This study introduces a framework and models for food waste per-
formance at three stages of a typical online food supply chain – the 
supplier, retailer, and customer. The framework and model, although 
applied in a practical setting, sets the stage for further theoretical 
development through mid-range theory, which is an approach to so-
ciological theorizing aimed at integrating theory and empirical research. 


The aim of this study is to evaluate the connections between NRBV and 
food waste with regards to factors that cause food waste, metrics and prac-
tices that are used to control, minimize, and mitigate the direct and indirect 
impacts of food waste along a supply chain. 


In this study, food waste is any waste of perishable products. This 
food waste can be generated at different online food retailer supply 
chain stages, including growing, harvesting, packaging, distribution, 
retail, and consumer households. This study uses the definitions of food 
waste and food surplus from Food Loss + Waste Protocol (2016), which 
are:  


• ‘Excess food that is not redistributed for animal feed, compost 
manufacturing, anaerobic digestion for energy regeneration or food 
charities, is considered food waste.’  


• ‘Alternatively, food surplus is defined as food that is not used for its 
primary purpose within the supply chain. Food surplus includes surplus 
generated by sales from supplier to the retailer and from the retailer to the 
customer.’ 


In addition, for the purpose of this study, food waste minimisation is 
defined as any measure that can be applied by the supplier or the retailer 
to minimize the output of food waste through strategies, such as greater 
collaboration among these two entities and enhanced supplier order 
forecast, as previous found by Mena, Adenso-Diaz, and Yurt (2011) and 
Göbel, Langen, Blumenthal, Teitscheid, and Ritter (2015). Alternatively, 
food waste mitigation can be defined as tactics adopted by the supplier, 
the retailer and customers to minimize end-of-pipe disposal of food 
waste through diversionary measures such as anaerobic digestion for 
energy production and food donations. Food waste mitigation has been 
previous studied by Aschemann-Witzel, De Hooge, Amani, Bech-Larsen, 
and Oostindjer (2015), Vandermeersch, Alvarenga, Ragaert, and Dewulf 
(2014) and von Kameke and Fischer (2018). 


Our paper contributes to the supply chain literature by:  


1. Developing a food waste minimization-and-mitigation model in an 
online grocery retail supply chain setting, which includes food waste 
metrics, minimization and mitigation strategies tailored for online 
supply chain environments;  


2. Establishing the direct and indirect outputs of food waste generated 
in an online retail supply chain, as well as the causes of food waste 
and mitigation strategies of supply chain actors;  


3. Bringing greater attention of the food waste debate in the online 
retail sector;  


4. Providing a middle range theoretic model (framework) to enhance 
understanding on theory and its application to this field. Although 
NRBV is the overall theory, it is also informed by: life cycle assess-
ment (environmental theory, Curran, 1996); critical success factors 
and key performance indicators (KPI, from critical success factor 
theory and performance measurement theory, Grimm, Hofstetter, & 
Sarkis, 2014); and organizational information processing (informa-
tion theory, Galbraith, 1973). 


The remainder of this paper begins with the literature review, gaps in 
knowledge, research questions and theoretical framework developed for 
the study. The methodology section includes case study details, followed 
by the results and analysis obtained in the case study. The discussion 
section includes comparisons between case study findings obtained and 
previous literature, resulting in a refined middle range theoretical 
framework. The paper concludes with a section summarizing the main 
contribution, research and managerial implications, limitations, and 
further research directions. 


1.1. Sustainable supply chain management, food waste and the Natural 
Resource Based View Theory 


This study adopts an NRBV theoretical perspective to food waste 
minimisation and mitigation. At the core of NRBV is the establishment of 
activities to help organizations build competitive advantages through 
environmental strategic benefits for organizations and their supply 
chains (Hart, 1995; Hart & Dowell, 2011). The environmental capabil-
ities aspects of NRBV include pollution prevention, product stewardship, 
and clean technology initiative constructs. These activities help orga-
nizations gain ‘win-win’ advantages. A core aspect of our study is 
investigating the management of food waste in the online food supply 
chain (FSC) through the theoretical lens of these NRBV capabilities. 


Pollution prevention initiatives within NRBV, are critical FSC stra-
tegies (Graham, Graham, & Holt, 2018; Graham & Potter, 2015; Islam, 
Tseng, & Karia, 2019; McDougall, Wagner, & MacBryde, 2016; Papar-
gyropoulou, Lozano, Steinberger, Wright, & Ujang, 2014). Minimization 
of food surpluses and avoidable food waste occur with pollution pre-
vention. Food surplus redistribution to groups affected by food poverty 
have linkages with product stewardship. Food waste conversion to an-
imal feed and anaerobic digestion are example clean technology prac-
tices (Mourad, 2016). 


NRBV—although usually viewed as a strategic theory—also informs 
operational theoretic elements to manage supply chain food waste. One 
important operational aspect of NRBV is information sharing; aligning 
with the online environmental characteristics of our case environment. 
Food waste minimisation in fresh FSCs, may be enhanced from sharing 
demand and shelf-life data among supply chain actors, ultimately 
reducing waste and facilitating improved sustainability performance 
(Kaipia, Dukovska-Popovska, & Loikkanen, 2013). Parallel process 
changes in information management and in material flow are necessary 
for effective transformation to negligible FSC food waste (Lusiantoro, 
Yates, Mena, & Varga, 2018). Information management capabilities can 
also benefit the product stewardship elements of NRBV for food waste 
management (Perey, Benn, Agarwal, & Edwards, 2018). Clean tech-
nology is another important NRBV capability construct. This capability 
is evident by green information systems support tools and ‘Industry 4.0’ 
playing key roles in managing FSC food waste (Miranda, Ponce, Molina, 
& Wright, 2019). These various NRBV capability elements provide 
operational theoretical support for the online case study. 


Effective information and knowledge sharing helps develop and 
incorporate new sustainability-oriented capabilities in FSCs. This 
dynamism includes integrating traditional supply chain with 
sustainability-oriented capabilities (Beske, Land, & Seuring, 2014). 
Building dynamic capabilities for sustainable natural resource use is 
central in emergent NRBV literature (McDougall et al., 2016). 


The remainder of this literature review section focuses on 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


3


identification, measurement, minimisation, and mitigation of food 
waste adopted in supply chain operations—each of which relates to 
NRBV. 


There is an emerging literature stream on food waste and SSCM 
related to causes and mitigation of food waste. Direct food waste 
causes include marketplace demand structure, product and process 
characteristics, and practical organizational policy patterns (Göbel 
et al., 2015; Mena et al., 2011). Supply chain activities that play vital 
roles in food waste mitigation, include transparency and demand in-
formation, food quality management and process control, shelf life 
management, and packaging design (Gardas, Raut, & Narkhede, 2017). 
Information sharing and communication are central to these inter- 
organizational food waste quantities and reduction efforts—and why 
we believe they are critical NRBV capabilities as well. The literature on 
food waste causes and mitigation also include customer behaviour as a 
source of food waste (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2015; Vandermeersch 
et al., 2014; von Kameke & Fischer, 2018). Customer motivation to 
avoid food waste, their management skills of food provisioning and food 
handling, and trade-offs between their priorities are how customers 
remain crucial actors for food waste mitigation in the downstream 
supply chain. 


Studies maintain the importance of metrics for managing supply 
chain and waste performance. Metrics that are used to measure food 
waste help quantify direct food waste impacts among the sustainability 
three pillars of the supply chain. Several recent studies on sustainable 
food supply chains focus on the metrics and implications of food waste 
across various food supply chain (FSC) stages (e.g. Brindley & Oxbor-
row, 2014; León-Bravo, Caniato, Caridi, & Johnsen, 2017) and consider 
broader FSC functional metrics relating to breeding or growing, pro-
cessing, distribution, retail, and consumption. Food safety, an important 
social sustainability metric, plays a large role in FSC (Wang, Huili, & 
Goh, 2018), which exemplifies that metrics may go beyond the NRBV 
related ones but may influence environmental issues. 


The need for food waste measurement systems in FSC is evidenced 
when three-quarters of all food waste-related global warming impacts 
originates from greenhouse gas (GHGs) emissions in agricultural pro-
duction (Scherhaufer, Moates, Hartikainen, Waldron, & Obersteiner, 
2017). Nevertheless, measuring food waste environmental burdens in 
isolation fails to account for other externalities food waste generates; 
including social and economic impacts (Dreyer, Dukovska-Popovska, 
Yu, & Hedenstierna, 2019). Measurement systems need to consider 
numerous issues across the supply chain. Broadly, Mena et al. (2011) 
found that food processing activities contribute 6%, retail and distri-
bution 7%, food consumption 8%, and food disposal 6% and emphasize 
that environmental degradation generated by food waste occurs across 
multiple supply chain stages. Kibler, Reinhart, Hawkins, Motlagh, and 
Wright (2018) highlight that another potential environmental concern, 
and requirement for FSC measurement systems and metrics, is water 
resource depletion from water embedded in food waste. Ridoutt, San-
guansri, and Sellahewa (2010) and Vanham, Bouraoui, Leip, Grizzetti, 
and Bidoglio (2015) identify water and nitrogen resource losses as sig-
nificant environmental resource impacts of food waste. These studies are 
only exemplary and further show the need for broader metrics and 
measurement systems to help determine FSC performance and mitiga-
tion activities. 


1.2. Gap in knowledge, conceptual model, and research questions 


In the literature review, we observe a very close linkage between 
NRBV and food waste management; even though the literature has not 
tied their results specifically to this theory. However, the food industry is 
evolving. The retail food portion of the supply chain has achieved 
greater online and e-commerce presence. Food waste in this environment 
has not seen much research. A basic question is whether NRBV can help 
gain insight on food waste in an online context. 


The online, e-commerce, environment has not been well studied, in 


general from a SSCM perspective. The NRBV framework can help build 
relevant theory and understanding for an environmentally sustainable 
digital supply chain. Digitization along the supply chain is a major 
emergent concern., the internet-of-things and mobile communication 
can each play roles in this environment (Kamble et al., 2019; Miranda 
et al., 2019 Saberi, Kouhizadeh, Sarkis, & Shen, 2018). 


Building performance measurement information sharing based on 
more specific performance metrics is a critical capability, given the 
breadth of sustainability and supply chain data. These systems can also 
be considered as clean technology. In this study, the clean technology 
construct of NRBV is an information sharing technology that would give 
organizations insights for SSCM. The product stewardship and pollution 
prevention NRBV constructs enable food waste minimisation and miti-
gation practices covered in this study. One of the research enquiries this 
study intends to investigate is whether information sharing technology 
is effective for FSC food waste management. 


Fig. 1 shows the conceptual mid-range theory framework initially 
developed for the study. Fig. 1 was constructed using literature and 
theory (see Table 1 for literature supporting inclusion and relation-
ships—some of this literature was reviewed in the previous section). In 
addition to inputs from various food supply chain experts—see the case 
study section for expert information—helped to inform initial frame-
work development. 


This mid-range theory helps scope and guide the research under-
taken in this study. The conceptual framework shows a one-way causal 
relationship between factors affecting food waste and food waste itself. 
The food waste also has economic, environmental and social impacts – 
greater food waste represents larger impact. The food waste has a 
relationship with food waste minimisation and mitigation, since food 
waste itself will likely originate different measures of food waste mini-
mization and reduction activities. The conceptual model includes dual- 
causal links food waste minimisation and mitigation to the NRBV ca-
pabilities, because some food waste management measures can be 
categorized as product stewardship activities or one of the other NRBV 
capabilities. In some cases, some NRBV measures represents a dynamic 
or supportive/overlapping relationship among the three NRBV ele-
ments, that is why product stewardship and clean technology has a dual- 
causal link among them. 


Table 1 records the previous studies used to construct the conceptual 
framework presented in Fig. 1. 


This study identifies main causes of food waste at different stages of 
the supply chain. Food waste mitigation improvements and mini-
misation solutions linked to three NRBV dynamic capabilities – pollution 
prevention, product stewardship and clean technologies – are identified 
and evaluated. This conceptual mid-range theoretic model is examined 
and underpinned in the context of an exemplar online food retail supply 
chain. Inputs from various actors in the food supply chain provide in-
sights for additional examination and refinement of the framework. 


In our review of the literature, utilizing NRBV and critical success 
factor theoretical lenses, we identify four major issues:  


• Previous research does not focus on how food waste should be 
measured holistically for a sustainability-driven food waste mea-
surement system.  


• Current studies do not seem to concentrate on food waste mitigation 
tactics and strategies across multiple supply chain stages.  


• The literature ignores the online supply chain and especially online 
grocers; and  


• There is limited broader theoretical linkage of food waste within 
operations and supply chain management. 


Within this context, the conceptual mid-range theory framework is 
used to investigate the following research questions: 


RQ1 - Which main factors generate food waste throughout the online 
FSC? 


RQ2 - Which metrics are useful for measuring the direct and indirect 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


4


impacts of food waste generated throughout the online FSC? 
RQ3 - What are the main food waste minimisation solutions adopted 


within the online food retail supply chain? 
RQ4 - What are the main food waste mitigation end-of-pipe im-


provements adopted throughout the online food retail supply chain? 
RQ5 - How could NRBV, critical success factor, organizational in-


formation processing and stakeholder theories provide insight into on-
line food retail supply chain to minimize and mitigate food waste? 


2. Methodology 


The conceptual framework and propositions developed from the case 
study research support theory building research (Carter & Rogers, 
2008). Middle-range (mid-range) theoretical frameworks (Meredith, 
1993; Weick, 1989) attempt to meet the criteria of a good theory but 
require additional improvement and revision. As a result, these frame-
works require multi-methodological approaches for mid-range theory 
refinement (Seuring, 2011). 


Fig. 1. Middle-range theoretical framework drawing from NRBV, critical success factor, stakeholder, and organizational information processing theories.  


Table 1 
Literature consulted to build the conceptual framework.  


Reference Factors Metrics Food waste minimisation and mitigation NRBV capabilities 


Pollution 
prevention 


Product stewardship Clean technology 


Alexander and Smaje (2008)  X     
Beretta, Stoessel, Baier, and Hellweg (2013)  X     
Betz, Buchli, Göbel, and Müller (2015)  X     
Chaboud and Daviron (2017)  X     
Davies and Legg (2018)   X    
De Lange and Nahman (2015)  X     
Gardas et al. (2017) X  X    
Göbel et al. (2015) X      
Graham et al. (2018)       
Graham and Potter (2015)    X   
Hart (1995)    X X X 
Hart and Dowell (2011)    X X X 
Islam et al. (2019)    X   
Kaipia et al. (2013) X  X    
Kiil et al. (2018)   X    
Kitinoja et al. (2018)   X    
Kummu et al. (2012)       
McDougall et al. (2016)       
Mourad (2016)   X   X  


Reference Factors Metrics Food waste minimisation and mitigation NRBV capabilities 
Pollution 
prevention 


Product stewardship Clean technology 


Mena et al. (2011) X  X    
Papargyropoulou et al. (2014)    X   
Shafiee-Jood and Cai (2016)   X    
Tsagatakis et al. (2016)  X     
Xu, Li, Ge, Yang, and Li (2018)   X     


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


5


Theory development is a main justification for this research to use a 
multi-methodological approach; albeit a single supply chain case study. 
Given the ‘wicked problem’ of food waste across a complex supply 
chain, there is a need for multi-dimensional data from suppliers, re-
tailers and customers. Food waste and hunger are wicked problems, 
largely because the food system is highly complex with many in-
terdependencies, nonlinear feedbacks, and uncertainties (Pereira & 
Drimie, 2016). The necessary data to help build solutions to wicked 
problems is not always accessible when a single method, such as 
interview-based case studies, is applied. 


A mid-range theory that links various antecedents and pressures 
causing food waste, to various organizational resources and capabilities 
– in this case performance systems and metrics – makes two contribu-
tions. First, it provides an explanation for the diversity of potential so-
lutions across the supply chain for sustainable food waste management. 
Secondly, it contributes to a descriptive theory for food waste manage-
ment in a supply chain setting. Mid-range theory and frameworks are 
valuable and formed in environments where multiple theories and 
methodologies are integrated into a systemic approach for theory 
development and refinement. 


An important initial step, as in our study, is to state the explicit 
research questions (Carter & Rogers, 2008), which we have done in the 
previous section. Although NRBV is the major theoretical perspective 
from which we draw, organizational information processing theory, 
stakeholder theory, and critical success factor theory, are also contrib-
utors, as part of a multi-theoretic perspective. The transition from 
framework to formal theory occurs as frameworks are evaluated against 
practice. Our research stimulates additional theory-building and con-
ceptual development within the SSCM field using this approach. 


This study uses a deep exemplar supply chain case study from the UK 
online food retail sector. As recommended by Yin (2009), an exemplar 
case study is one with unique characteristics and that can be used for 
theory development. Case studies are exceptional vehicles for mid-range 
theory development (George, Bennett, Lynn-Jones, & Miller, 2005). 
Although this is a single case study, there are opportunities to evaluate 
some of the existing theories, e.g. NRBV, and provide avenues for further 
theorizing and middle-range theory development (Flyvbjerg, 2006). 


The case study includes the following partner organizations:  


• The focal company: An online food retailer with sustainability, 
entrepreneurship and innovation as their main strategic priorities.  


• The supplier: A salad supplier with an objective to become a zero 
waste and carbon neutral company in the next decade.  


• The not-for-profit consultancy: A non-governmental organization 
(NGO) whose main priority is to facilitate best practices imple-
mentation to minimize organic and plastic waste from retail grocery 
supply chains. 


In this case, the food retailer is the focal company, the salad supplier 
is the supplier in the case study, and salads are the product. Our justi-
fication is as follows:  


• The online food retailer is one of the biggest and fastest growing food 
retailers in the world;  


• The online food retailer has devised a food surplus redistribution 
network with a number of food charities, redirecting 2200 t of food 
and donating eight refrigerated distribution vans to the Ocado food 
partners;  


• The online food retailer has access to end-to-end supply chain data, 
including customer data;  


• Salads is one of the top 10 most wasted food products across the 
supply chain; and;  


• The salads supplier includes various practices including circular 
economic practices in their operations model. 


This study’s online supply chain consists of five stages: supplier – in 


charge of farming and packaging processes; retailer – manages distri-
bution centres (DC) and spokes; customer, food partners, and sales staff. 
The entity in this case study seeking food waste control and reduction 
across the supply chain is the retailer, a leading player in the online 
supermarket sector. Fig. 2 presents a graphical representation of the 
supply chain studied, including the inbound, outbound and reverse 
supply chain stages of the online food retailer. 


The research was undertaken by adopting a multi-method approach, 
following Frankle, Naslund, and Bolumole’s (2005) recommendation on 
using multiple methods in supply chain management and logistics 
research due to the complexities of this discipline. Jack and Raturi 
(2006) also recommend that researchers should choose methods with 
complementary strengths and non-overlapping weaknesses. The 
methods used for this case study complement each other, the interviews 
undertaken provide an explanatory angle to the case; the customer and 
supplier surveys complement the interview data collected by adding the 
perspectives of a representative sample of suppliers and customers to the 
analysis. Furthermore, a supply chain simulation presented in the dis-
cussion section demonstrates the impact that enhanced supply forecasts 
can have on food waste. 


The methodology has four main stages with multiple interacting data 
gathering and analyses, namely interviews with managers, suppliers, 
and an NGO provide qualitative data, acquisition and analysis of soft and 
hard (quantitative) data using questionnaire-based surveys of customers 
and suppliers, archival and factual information gathered from the sup-
plier and the online food retailer to measure food waste across the 
supply chain and analytical models to quantify various effects. Fig. 3 
summarizes the case study methodology stages. 


This multiple-methodology approach allows data collection from 
multiple stakeholders that caused or are affected by food waste to help 
refine the middle-level theory framework (Seuring, 2011). Multiple 
approaches provide a deeper picture, since collecting data from one or a 
limited number of stakeholders through interviews constrains the 
research problem. 


This study consists of a four-stage methodology that includes the 
conceptual, expert opinion, empirical and framework refinement stages. 
The research process started with scoping meetings with the online 
retailer that took place between May and June 2018. The supplier and 
customer surveys, and raw data gathering occurred between July and 
December 2018. The conceptual model, semi-interviews, data analysis 
and refinement of the conceptual model were undertaken between 
January and April 2019. The research process was rolled out in two 
phases since the research team needed further qualitative evidences 
gathered from interviews, comprehensive literature review and 
exhaustive data analysis to develop the paper. 


Also, the conceptual framework stage is informed by recent aca-
demic literature and theory on food waste in supply chains, and food 
waste reports published by WRAP and FAO. The conceptual model was 
refined using expert opinion gathered from the participating companies; 
and with archival data gathered from the supplier, the online food 
retailer, and the customer questionnaire. Data was collected from the 
different stages of the research, and then compared with previous 
literature. Iterations occurred to refine the conceptual framework, but 
also various data from methodological stages was revisited in further 
refinement and for validity and reliability evaluation, as described later 
in our description of the validity and reliability measures taken for this 
study. The iterations shown in Fig. 3 represent comparisons in the study 
from various data sources and is addressed with the iterations and 
arrows. 


During the expert opinion stage, a structured questionnaire instru-
ment helps to acquire information from a representative supplier sample 
(see Appendix 1). Initially, all 20 major food suppliers of the online food 
retailer were invited; five suppliers responded to the questionnaire. 
Semi-structured interviews (see Appendix 2) with online food retail 
managers, their main salads supplier, and an NGO waste consultant 
occurred. The questions included in the interview protocol – see 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


6


Appendix 2 – were directly linked to the research questions investigated 
in the study. All the elements of the mid-range theoretical framework 
presented in Fig. 1 were included in the interview protocol. These ele-
ments include food waste causes, minimisation and mitigation strate-
gies, as well as the three components of the NRBV theory. During the 
semi-structured interview, when interviewees mentioned specific cau-
ses of food waste the interviewer asked them whether or not the causes 
mentioned were primary or secondary causes of food waste. Similarly, 
participants were queried on whether the food waste mitigation end-of- 
pipe improvements and minimisation in-process solutions were already 
implemented by their organizations, being piloted, currently considered, 
planning to be considered or not considered. 


The supplier questionnaire queries were aimed at undertaking an 
initial screening of all the online food retailer’s salad suppliers, a total of 
20 suppliers, to determine their percentage of food waste. The surveys 
also enquired about food waste causes and food waste mitigation end-of- 
pipe improvements; actions that were identified by the literature 
informed the questions used. Questions 2 and 3 were aimed at 


determining the main food waste causes generated by the supplier and 
the food waste mitigation end-of-pipe improvements adopted by them. 
The lists provided in these two questions were initially derived from the 
literature review and an ‘Other’ option was also provided to re-
spondents. A group of managers from the not-for-profit consultancy and 
the purchasing department of online food retailer informed the supplier 
questionnaire, initial responses from two close online food retailer 
suppliers were also received. This initial feedback helped refine the 
questionnaire. 


The empirical stage includes data collection on food waste practices 
from the online food retailer and its main suppliers, as well as structured 
questionnaire survey (See Appendix 3). It was administered by the on-
line food retailer, resulting in 900 customer respondents. The food waste 
causes listed in question 3 and the food waste mitigation end-of-pipe 
improvements listed in question 4 of the customer questionnaire were 
derived initially from the literature review with an ‘Other’ option pro-
vided to respondents. The customer questionnaire was revised by 
managers from the not-for-profit consultancy, and the sustainability and 


Fig. 2. – Graphical representation of the extended online supply chain studied. 
Note: ‘Purge’ is excess food that may become food waste. It is used, as further identified later in the paper, by the online retailer to describe this excess 
food phenomenon. 


Fig. 3. Stages and methodologies undertaken during the case study.  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


7


marketing departments of the online food retailer. Also, the customers 
invited to take part in the survey are a representative sample of cus-
tomers in terms of gender, income, number of people living in customer 
households and geographical location. Selected customers order salads 
products from the online food retailer at least on a monthly basis. As 
Appendix 4 shows, this sample is diverse in terms of gender, income and 
number of people in customer households. 


The roles, company type and years of experience of the practitioners 
who participated throughout this case study period appear in Appendix 
5. 


The refinement stage includes a comparison between findings gath-
ered from the study and previous literature; as well as various theories to 
inform the middle theory. 


It is also pertinent to evaluate the research quality by considering its 
validity and reliability. Given reliance on the case study methodology in 
this study, we use Yin (2009) guidelines to evaluate these 


characteristics. Table 2 shows the evaluation criteria recommended by 
Yin (2009) against tactics adopted in the different stages of the case 
study. 


The three types of validity suggested by Yin (2009)—construct, in-
ternal and external validity—have been addressed. A wide range of 
evidence was gathered during the case study and all the data sources 
were appropriately triangulated. The themes gathered in the case study 
were used in the analysis to cross-compare the findings. Furthermore, a 
protocol was developed to undertake the case study to ensure reliability 
during the data collection process; specific tactics appear in Table 2. 


During the case study, data was collected based on a protocol which 
was produced based on themes found in the literature. The data 
collected from the interviews, customer and supplier surveys, and the 
simulation are complementary of each other. Also, the data gathered 
from the interviews were recorded and transcribed. Transcripts were 
sent to participants seeking their validation. A report was produced and 
sent to the case study companies to give a final opportunity to the 
participating practitioners to provide feedback on the research and 
results. 


3. Results and analysis 


This section presents the case study analysis and results to inform the 
refinement of the mid-range theory framework related to factors 
affecting the generation of food waste, food waste metrics, food waste 
minimization and mitigation improvements and solutions. This in-depth 
study occurred over a year’s worth of meetings, discussions, data 
gathering and evaluation. The research team, although not using an 
ethnographic study, had over a dozen planned interactions throughout 
this study period. Many informal contacts with different actors in the 
study, through short phone calls, emails, and correspondences were also 
completed. 


We begin by providing general observations concerning food waste 
factors, specifically focusing on fresh prepared salads. These observa-
tions from the case and data, in addition to the literature as summarized 
in Table 1, help arrive at several propositions. 


3.1. Factors affecting food waste across the salad online grocery retail 
supply chain case study 


Food waste generation factors appear from supplier and customer 
structured questionnaire-based surveys, interviews, and face-to-face 
meetings with the online food retailer. The main supplier food waste 
antecedents included poor forecasts of supply and demand (Mena et al., 
2011; Thyberg & Tonjes, 2016), insufficient information sharing be-
tween the supplier and the online food retailer (Kaipia et al., 2013), and 
arbitrarily determined short shelf life (Spada, Conte, & Del Nobile, 
2018). The online food retailer attributes its food waste mainly to 
customer demand uncertainty. Customers think their buying, con-
sumption, and eating habits are the principal factors of food waste 
generated at their end. 


According to the online food retailer, the top factor of waste gener-
ation at the retailer stage is customer demand uncertainty caused by 
weather sensitive and seasonal demand that affects customer order 
quantities. Food waste is also due to the online retailer customer guar-
antee (Göbel et al., 2015). The guarantee is to provide customers with 
arbitrary freshness guarantees on all the perishable product families. 
This policy forces the company to apply discounts to products that are 
approaching their expiration date; furthering demand disturbances 
across other fresh products. 


The online retailer stated that some external factors cause small 
amounts of food waste generated at their DCs. 


A senior supply chain manager stated: ‘when our supplier sends a short 
shelf-life product we do not expect, that would lead us to throw away more’; 


The head of operations excellence added: ‘…in addition to short shelf- 
life product, changes in weather can play a role, changes in weather cause 


Table 2 
Yin’s (2009) tactics to evaluate the research quality.  


Test Tactics applied in the research Research stages 


Construct 
validity  


• Multiple evidence was gathered during the 
four stages of the case study, namely data 
collected from 8 semi-structured interviews, 
survey responses from 900 customers (out of 
a representative sample of 5000) and 5 
suppliers (out of a total of 20 suppliers) and 
a simulation based on perishable goods in-
ventory models.  


• The data gathered during the four stages 
were appropriately triangulated.  


• Drafts of the notes produced during the 
interviews were written and sent to 
participants for their approval.  


• A report was generated and sent to 
participants to give them a final opportunity 
to provide feedback. 


Data collection 
and analysis 


Internal 
validity  


• The data gathered from the four stages was 
analysed based on themes found during the 
literature review and the semi-structured 
interviews.  


• The data gathered during the interviews was 
analysed by comparing the responses 
provided by participants.  


• The consumer survey data was used to add 
the consumer perspective on the research 
questions. 


Data analysis 


External 
validity  


• Two supply chain actors (the supplier and 
the online retailer) and a representative 
sample of the retailer customers and 
suppliers took part in the study.  


• A not-for-profit consultancy from the food 
retailer that has specialised knowledge on 
food waste was included in the study to 
provide a wider perspective on the research 
questions.  


• The online retailer is one of the biggest and 
fastest growing in the world and has access 
to end-to-end supply chain data.  


• The three participating companies and the 
practitioners interviewed are regarded as 
experts in specialist areas relevant to the 
case study.  


• The NRBV theory—along with other 
supporting theories—were used to enhance 
the theoretical underpinnings of the case 
study. 


Research design 
process 


Reliability  • A protocol was developed to conduct the 
case study.  


• The semi-structured interviews, and the 
customer and supplier surveys were 
completed using a well-developed protocol.  


• This protocol was produced based on 
themes found in the literature review and 
based on theory. 


Data collection  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


8


unexpected demand changes generated from the customer side. It is harder to 
achieve high degrees of forecast accuracy and that can cause food waste’. 


The retailer’s head of corporate responsibility and corporate affairs 
retailer added: ‘one of the main causes of food waste is customer over pur-
chase. Though, other significant causes of food waste include customer de-
mand uncertainty and disturbances originating at the supplier such as supply 
uncertainty and lack of information sharing between the supplier and our 
company’. 


The five suppliers who responded to the survey identify poor fore-
casting of supply and demand as the top cause of their food waste. Three 
of the five participating suppliers identify insufficient information 
sharing caused their food waste. They also replied that retailer rejections 
due to poor product quality causes food waste. Only two suppliers 
mentioned crop issues with mould and diseases as a cause of crop waste; 
but these responses show that such events do occur. 


These results are summarized in Table 3. 
The salad supplier provided another perspective: 
‘The main factor causing organic waste at the supplier end is unpredict-


able weather. This situation affects supply forecast accuracy in the long term. 
Although inaccurate forecasts of supply and retailer’s demand are other 
important factors that cause food waste. Another less important factor is 
unexpected damaged crops caused by pests and diseases.’ 


This supplier statement suggests the retailer has a very small surplus 
of salad in comparison to the supplier and the order forecasting process 
can negatively affect their demand forecast accuracy. 


The salad supplier also stated that: ‘if customers are being encouraged 
by retailers to buy more than they actually need or can consume, then this can 
lead to inaccurate supplier order forecast, having a knock-on effect of the 
amount of surplus their company produces.’ 


Based on these initial observations and, from literature summarized 
in Table 1, we arrive at our first research proposition, previously 
confirmed by Mena et al. (2011), Thyberg and Tonjes (2016) and Kaipia 
et al. (2013). 


Proposition 1. : In the online food supply chain, variability and un-
certainty in demand forecasting and supply capabilities contribute 
greatly to food waste in the upstream supply chain. 


These initial interviews and surveys of suppliers represent waste 
factors in the upstream portion of the supply. Downstream, from the 
online retailer, concerns also exist. A customer survey informs the study 
to determine food waste factors from the downstream, customer 
perspective. Fig. 4 summarizes major customer household food waste 
causes. According to the customer survey results, 47% of salad waste 
from customer households is from customer behaviour and consumption 
habits. Not consuming due to quality defects was mentioned by 31% of 
customers surveyed as a reason for food waste. Customers do not 
consume all the salad products they purchase because of poor product 
quality at the point of intended consumption; however, customers could 
be educated on the best storage and control means to avoid food waste 
coming from refrigeration. 


The NGO’s food waste technical specialist, provided some insights: 
‘At the supplier side, the main factor is crop condition affected by weather 


and climate, pest pressure and soil conditions. From the supply chain 
perspective, the main factors are inadequate product quality specifications, 
and inaccuracy of demand and supply forecasting. On the customer side, 
currently there is no education available for the customer. They need to be 


made aware of the consequence of their purchasing decision in terms how 
much waste output is generated at the retailer and supplier due to unexpected 
amendments in their orders’. 


The food waste research manager added: 
‘The retailer should agree with the supplier on the true impact their quality 


specifications have on food waste. They need to establish whether there is 
demand for lower-but-edible fresh produce products. The studies undertaken 
by our company on the introduction of this type of product adopted by other 
UK retailers have proved how this policy measure can generate significant 
reductions in food waste across retail supply chains’. 


These concerns are similar to “best-before-date” marketing and 
potentially health policy settings for food (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 
2015). Although it is difficult to change customer behaviour, many 
theories exist in marketing to address pro-environmental behaviour 
(Groening, Sarkis, & Zhu, 2018). Organizational activities could include 
careful customer-related food waste management decisions such as date 
labelling, packaging design, and price strategies to help shift customer 
priorities (Aschemann-Witzel, de Hooge, & Normann, 2016; von 
Kameke & Fischer, 2018). These observations and literature lead to our 
second proposition, which is true for the online FSC environment. 


Proposition 2a. : Organizational policies and routines play significant 
roles in food waste generation; especially within the retailer-customer 
supply chain partnership. 


Proposition 2b. : Poorly aligned marketing and customer promotion 
policies cause unpredictability and uncertainty in demand leading to 
greater food waste in the system. 


Proposition 2c. : Quality and product performance policies can 
greatly influence food waste generation throughout the supply chain. 


3.2. Food waste measurement along the supply chain– Environmental, 
economic and social metrics 


The management processes and routines used to mitigate the food 
waste problem are dependent on identifying problem areas and 
improving their performance. Metrics are critical for these endeavours. 


Metrics help prioritize and identify problem areas. The case study 
also sought to evaluate how various metrics, data, and models are useful 
to the organization. According to critical success factor theory (Grimm 
et al., 2014), identifying and focusing on specific critical success factors, 
in this case sustainability factors and metrics, is a corporate enabler. 
Metrics help prioritize NRBV-based capabilities, further described in the 
next section. The metrics management tools developed from the case 
study are important for food waste prevention and mitigation. 


For holistic sustainability management along the supply chain, the 
KPIs in the three sustainability domains must be regularly monitored 
and evaluated. For example, if there are limited economic returns or 
environmental impacts, management efforts and building capabilities 
for minimizing food waste might be ignored by the relevant supply chain 
actor. 


In order to enhance our understanding of food waste, we imple-
mented an Excel-based tool to measure and report on three dimensions 
of sustainability by using the data collected during the research. The tool 
is coded in Excel Visual Basic for Applications and is tested by both the 
academic team and the focal company. A summary of the food waste 
measurement and metrics tool KPIs appear in Table 4. 


As seen in Table 4, the proposed tool was designed to consolidate 
data derived from suppliers to customers and provide relevant KPIs and 
metrics with an acceptable level of accuracy. A representative sample of 
perishable products has been studied in the application this tool; since 
not all products and information were initially available. Table 5 high-
lights the data required from each supply chain partner to estimate the 
food waste measurement tool KPIs. This data helps to identify, develop, 
and acquire required information. It also highlights aspects of waste, 
measure, and location requiring waste minimization. 


Table 3 
Top four causes of salad waste as identified by suppliers.  


Cause Number of suppliers 


Poor supply and demand forecasting 4 
Poor quality, reject by retailers. 3 
Insufficient information sharing between farmers and 


retailers 
3 


Issues like mould and diseases 2  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


9


From a methodological perspective, the tool takes the data listed in 
Table 5 as input and classifies the data provided by focal company data 
for a given period. 


This classification is based on the origin depot, destination spoke, 
time period, and SKU. The tool considers all order data and calculates 
the net amount sold from a specific origin to a specific spoke. The tool 
can calculate quantity sold to customers and the redistributed food 
surplus. The tool also calculates individual food factors such as whether 
food was sent to the company shop, charities, and food banks. After 
identifying product sales quantities, the total received and total ordered 
amounts from the supplier are determined. The supplier side total pro-
duction percentage that is redistributed or wasted is then determined. 
Based on the actual sales, for a given period – such as a week or month – 
the tool determines the total amount of waste of a specific product at the 
customer side. Given limited customer data, it is assumed that all 
customer generated food waste is landfilled or redistributed for anaer-
obic digestion. 


All wastes generated along the supply chain are calculated as 
explained. Other sustainability KPI metrics are calculated using the 
relevant emissions models and Bluewater footprint ratios. Economic 
KPIs are also calculated from the date provided by the focal company, 
including opportunity cost and lost sales. The tool along with 


sustainability metrics discussion and standardization allows stake-
holders to arrive at comparable evaluations. Metrics and units of mea-
surements agreement helps stakeholders benchmark and identify major 
factors and capabilities solutions, as highlighted by Scherhaufer et al. 
(2017) and Dreyer et al. (2019). 


Proposition 3. : Standardized sustainability metrics and information 
processing are needed to support KPI development for food waste 
management along the supply chain. 


The current metrics tool waste information output is specific to the 
case company (Table 6 is one example). Table 6 presents an example of 
annual aggregated sustainability and environmental analysis of food 
waste for a single product. Table 6 categorizes metrics across three 
supply chain stages—inbound, outbound, and reverse supply chain 
stages. 


To have a better understanding of Table 6 values, a number of as-
sumptions hold and include:  


• A single perishable product is investigated.  
• Analysis is based on a yearly data obtained from the focal company, 


single supplier (i.e., grower and packager in this example) and a 
sample of customers who purchased this type of product.  


• All customer orders are sold from a single depot to customers via 
several geographically scattered and smaller depots.  


• Since there is no data on customer location; average distance from 
the closest depots are assumed for the calculation of outbound- 
related transportation.  


• All other related data regarding the type of vehicles used, capacities 
and emissions are calculated using the latest NAEI (National Atmo-
spheric Emissions Inventory) model. 


• A specific coefficient has been used for calculating Bluewater foot-
print for the amount produced at supplier side.  


• It is assumed that all waste generated at the supplier side is sent for 
anaerobic digestion and all wastes generated at the customer side are 
sent to landfill. 


The focal company and its supply chain partners viewed this infor-
mation as valuable since it identified various stages, standardized data, 
and various stakeholders. Standardization, within organizational infor-
mation processing theory, is critical for performance measurement 
effectiveness (Gattiker & Goodhue, 2004; Yadav, Garg, & Luthra, 2020). 


Fig. 4. Top four causes of salad waste by customers.  


Table 4 
Food waste metrics information developed in the case study.  


Environment Economic Social 


KPIs Unit KPIs Unit KPIs Unit 


CO2e emissions 
(organic) 


Kg Supplier 
waste 


% Donation rate to 
foodbanks 


% 


CO2e emissions 
(transportation) 


Kg Supplier 
waste 


kg Donation rate to 
charities 


% 


Blue water footprint liter Retailer waste %   
Anaerobic digestion % Retailer waste kg Discounted sales 


to employees 
£ 


Customer 
waste 


%   


Customer 
waste 


kg   


Opportunity 
cost 


£   


Lost sales £    


Table 5 
Data requirements from each supply chain partner, including the online retailer.  


Supplier Customer Online retailer 


Grower Packer Actual customer Charities Foodbank Focal company 


Production plan & schedule Order quantity (kg); 
required quantity; 
waste 


Sales (units or kg); 
Delivery window 


Required amount 
(units or kg); Time 
window 


Required amount 
(units or kg); Time 
window 


Received quantity (units or kg); delivery plan 


Delivery plan; redistributed 
amount (anaerobic 
digestion) 


Delivery plan Waste Waste Waste Quantity sold to customer; sent to charities 
and food banks; anaerobic digestion; 
discounted sales to staff  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


10


The multiple stakeholder perspective is also critical for effective adop-
tion and trust in this system (Bundy, Vogel, & Zachary, 2018; Mena, 
Hult, Ferrell, & Zhang, 2019); multiple stakeholder information and 
input was used in the development of this tool. It has also been found 
that more effective sustainability performance measurement and sus-
tainability practices occur when multiple stages of the supply chain are 
carefully considered (León-Bravo, Caniato, & Caridi, 2019; Scherhaufer 
et al., 2017). 


To support this tool, information from each supply chain actor – 
grower, packer, customers, charities, and food banks – is needed. Instead 
of only monitoring company operations waste, the company now has 
access to broader supply chain waste information. This broader infor-
mation provides a holistic perspective to better develop supply chain 
capabilities and identify the resources for SSCM. 


A different set of sustainability metrics exist for upstream and 
downstream supply chain activities. These KPIs were specifically 
selected to help the organization reduce wastes and identify sustain-
ability co-benefits or trade-offs. 


Proposition 4a. : Effective FSC waste management requires various 
stakeholder inputs to sustainability metrics development and 


standardization. 


Proposition 4b. : Inter-organizational and stakeholder-specific sus-
tainability KPIs aid reduction of food waste along the supply chain. 


3.3. Prepared food waste generated along the supply chain 


This section exemplifies some output of the metrics tool and data 
from the case study. It is useful to help identifying the waste flows along 
the supply chain to help identify and mitigate food waste (de Moraes, de 
Oliveira Costa, Pereira, da Silva, & Delai, 2020). The Sankey dia-
gram–see Fig. 5—is one such important mapping. 


These results help identify major problem areas, potential stake-
holder interests, and food waste causes. The metrics tool is an organi-
zational capability that did not exist previously. General analysis from 
the metrics tool, that is used to generate Fig. 5 and that informs the mid- 
theory framework and relationship (Fig. 1) is presented. 


The supply chain food waste measurement tool includes suppliers of 
lettuce, baby leafs and celery. The metrics tool application results 
indicate the scope and location to reduce food waste. Fig. 5 shows 11% 
of the supplier production is crop food waste. Wastes (surpluses) not 


Table 6 
An example output of annual aggregated sustainability analysis of food waste for a chosen single product.     


Supply chain stage 


Impact Metric Total Inbound Outbound Reverse 
Environmental CO2e emissions (organic) (kg) 541,307  X X 


CO2e emissions (transportation) (kg) 75,546 (104,325) X X  
Blue water footprint (litres) 3,413,467 X   
Anaerobic digestion (kg) 44,451*   X 


Economic Supplier waste (%) 13.61    
Supplier waste (£) 44,451 X   
Retailer waste (%) 0.00    
Retailer waste (kg) 3 X   
Customer waste (%) 12.00    
Customer waste (kg) 33,845  X  
Opportunity cost (£) 349.68    
Lost sales (£) 6925  X  


Social Total donated amount (charities & food banks) (kg) 2820   X 
Discounted sales to employees (£) 1046   X  


* The total amount sent for anaerobic digestion by the focal company and the supplier. 


Fig. 5. Overall share of waste (%) in tonnes for the three salad categories included in the case study.  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


11


disposed may flow to other uses, e.g. 4.18% of food waste goes to 
anaerobic digestion and 2.75% donated to charities. These flows may 
not be ‘by-products’ and considered wastes since they are not made into 
new products or chemicals from which the suppliers generate revenue 
(Lin et al., 2013); although composting and energy generation may 
generate revenue or as resources for other processing activities. 


The supplier food surplus is not landfilled, it is redistributed for food 
waste mitigation purposes, which contrasts with waste generated at 
customer households. Customer food waste represents 18% of purchases 
from the retailers. Of this food waste, 7.38% goes to landfills. There are 
no dedicated food waste collection systems for a significant proportion 
of the participating customers. However, customers use approximately 
7% of their food waste to make compost for gardening proposes or as pet 
food. 


The final food stream shows that 70% of the product was consumed 
as intended. Ample opportunity exists to manage the remaining food 
waste. 


The metrics tool supports the economic, environmental and social 
measurement of food waste. Its environmental KPIs use food waste to 
calculate the total emissions created during transportation, the total 
emissions emitted during production at the supplier site, and the total 
blue water footprint generated at the supplier site. The analysis includes 
two online retailer distribution centres. As shown in Table 4, knowing 
the waste leads to determining unnecessary CO2e emissions and blue 
water footprints. 


These numbers are valuable because not only is the 
food—salad—wasted, but the waste embedded energy and water related 
to production and transportation of salad. These measures help identify 
opportunities and capabilities for managing emissions and blue water 
footprint. Table 6 highlights the need for monitoring the waste and its 
three pillars of sustainability implications. Even though an online 
retailer may perform better compared to other retailers, the food waste 
environmental impacts are still significant. Thus, there is an argument to 
utilize critical success factors, from critical success factor theory (Grimm 
et al., 2014; Sellitto, Vial, & Viegas, 2018), to help identify what supply 
chain stakeholders, related to stakeholder theory (Freeman, 1984; 
Shankar, Gupta, & Pathak, 2018), contribute to these measures. The 
results from this information and sources need to be managed by 
building supply chain capabilities that include – according to NRBV 
(Hart, 1995; Hart & Dowell, 2011) – end-of-pipe, in-process, and pre-
vention solutions. This type of solutions are pollution prevention capa-
bilities critical to NRBV (Graham et al., 2018; Graham & Potter, 2015; 
Islam et al., 2019; McDougall et al., 2016; Papargyropoulou et al., 
2014). 


These observations lead to a general proposition related to the in-
teractions between the tool, causes, and capabilities development. 


Proposition 5. : Supply chain information processing aids food waste 
management and capability requirements identification. Dynamic sup-
ply chain-specific resources and capabilities are needed to address food 
waste along the supply chain. 


3.4. Food waste mitigation end-of-pipe improvements 


The online retailer generates salad waste at about 1%, and with this 
amount representing 0.02% of food wasted across all the perishable 
product ranges (just 1 in 6000 items); evidence of progress made on their 
nearly zero-waste journey. In 2017, instead of disposing food, the online 
retailer redistributed 2200 t of fresh food to 17 food partners – the 
company shop “70% discount”, food banks, charities, and zoos. 


The online retailer viewed these efforts as food waste mitigation end- 
of-pipe improvements; specifically, the online retailer operations 
excellence director stated: 


‘If there is any purge, a very small percentage of purge, then tactically we 
could sell it on or offer it to charities, homeless charities and foodbanks…. 
Even local zoos who are very keen to take some, and they offer discounts to 


staff from the online retailer to visit those local zoos’. 
The online retailer head of corporate responsibility and corporate 


affairs also commented on this issue: 
‘There is a wide range of charities that we work with, and we try to work 


with local charities that are close to our distribution centres. We donated vans 
to the local charities since they do not have the means to redistribute the food 
we donated to them. We also donate small proportions of our food surplus to 
AD (anaerobic digestion) and zoos. Historically, we also look at carbon in 
transportation, ensuring goods and food being moved between sites are as low 
carbon as possible. With this in mind, we recently purchased a fleet of CNG 
natural gas trucks to compliment this approach’. 


There are a range of corrective tactics for suppliers and customers to 
mitigate food waste—see Fig. 6. 


According to the survey results, upstream, 37% of supplier crop 
waste is composted, 25% goes to charity and 25% is used for anaerobic 
digestion energy plants. Additionally, 13% of suppliers responding to 
this survey used surpluses (purge) for other types of energy generation. 
According to crop waste measurement and analysis from the case study 
supplier, the total production output surplus was 11%. Anaerobic 
digestion uses 2.75% and other types of energy generation technologies 
use 1.45%; another 2.75% is donated to charities. 


The supplier technical innovation and sustainability manager stated: 
‘Surplus generated from harvesting is ploughed back into the fields to 


retain some of the carbon that has been used by the plants in the soil. We also 
have our own anaerobic digestion plant to counter some of the energy from 
our crops that has been wasted. We produce our own compost by using any 
waste we generate and sell some waste products as animal feed … We send 
about a quarter of our waste to anaerobic digestion (AD), since AD is 
probably the most effective food waste mitigation tactic. We try to achieve 
carbon neutrality because we are able to capture heat and electricity that we 
can use them again in our factories’. 


In this example, there are environmental mitigation strategies 
especially associated with CO2e reduction. The focus was to be able to 
reuse embedded energy, carbon, and even water resources to help 
mitigate the environmental damage caused by food waste. As part of this 
effort, they began to realize how much of each waste can be used in 
different areas. In some cases, the benefit was environmental and some 
were economic (generating revenue through resale). Some research has 
investigated supply chain position for some environmental mitigation 
strategies and position may differ in terms of impact (Garnett, 2011). 


We make the following observation. The capabilities developed to 
reduce supply chain food waste see support from multiple sustainability 
metrics (Brindley & Oxborrow, 2014; de Moraes et al., 2020; Gardas 
et al., 2017; León-Bravo et al., 2017). These metrics consider various 
activities, by multiple supply chain stakeholders. Capabilities, metrics, 


Fig. 6. Salad waste outcomes for suppliers and customers.  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


12


and resources can support particular stakeholder and sustainability 
concerns given the resources available, their supply chain positioning 
and the type of waste utilized (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2017; Mena 
et al., 2011; Muth et al., 2019). This leads to the following research 
proposition: 


Proposition 6. : There exists a contingent NRBV, based on stakeholder 
and KPI concerns, where capabilities and actions are dependent on 
supply chain actor, metric used, and product processing aspects. 


Mitigation rather than reduction is the main goal of food waste 
management programmes since the online food supply chain takes 
meeting market demand as its main priority. In the downstream supply 
chain, 40% of the customer waste is recycled through municipal circular 
economic channels for animal feed and renewable energy generation. 
This circular economic approach is an NRBV-based, product stewardship 
capability-building example (Lehtokunnas, Mattila, Närvänen, & 
Mesiranta, 2020; Miranda et al., 2019; Perey et al., 2018). These circular 
economy practices can also generate additional funds from food waste 
by-products (Garcia-Garcia, Stone, & Rahimifard, 2019; Göbel et al., 
2015; Teigiserova, Hamelin, & Thomsen, 2020). 


A fraction (16%) becomes customer compost for gardening purposes; 
3% becomes pet food. The remaining, and largest percentage (41%) of 
household food waste goes to landfills. A significant proportion of local 
council across the UK do not provide dedicated food waste collection 
service from the customer households. 


The NGO food waste technical specialist summarizes: 
‘On the supplier side, salad producers send their surplus to livestock 


holders for animal feed. They use part of their surplus in their anaerobic 
digestion plants, if they have one, or for making their own compost’. 


The NGO food waste research manager also confirms the 
observation: 


‘UK retailers redistribute a large proportion of their fresh food surplus to 
charity, similar to the case of the online food retailer; and, UK retailers are 
currently redistributing a very small proportion of their fresh produce waste to 
anaerobic digestion plants, since anaerobic digestion technology requires 
heavy up-front investment. Retailers, including the food online retailer, 
continue to join the debate ensuring that landfill should not be a preferred 
financial mechanism for food that can be redistributed’. 


Proposition 7a. : Mitigation strategies seek to minimize costs or 
generate additional revenues from food waste. 


Proposition 7b. : The NRBV holds in the food supply chain as ‘win- 
win’ opportunities are sought. 


Proposition 7c. : Product stewardship and clean technology initia-
tives for mitigation create ‘win-win’ opportunities. 


Anaerobic digestion is a clean technology that helps mitigate the 
food waste impact. This mitigation tactic benefit generates enough 
revenue to offset costs. These benefits represent additional resources and 
capabilities to help mitigate the food waste environmental burden. This 
initiative is a joint effort that includes their supply chain partners and 
the non-profit technical experts. 


3.5. Food waste minimization in-process solutions 


Whereas food waste end-of-pipe solutions mitigate food waste 
impact; food waste prevention in-process activities are available supply 
chain tactics. 


Poor customer demand forecasting is a major food waste generation 
factor. According to the senior supply chain manager: 


‘The online food retailer supply chain department works with the ICT 
(information and communication technology) team on customer demand 
forecast accuracy. They develop algorithms to improve supplier order fore-
cast. We are also planning to bring in new technologies such as machine 
learning to improve our demand forecast further. When we realise that an 
SKU (stock keeping unit) is not selling as fast as we predicted, we introduce a 


website discount promotion driven by food waste minimisation. These pro-
motions are introduced automatically by connecting our website sales portal 
with our livestock data.’ 


The senior supply chain manager mentioned clean technology ef-
forts, e.g. decision support and information technology as valuable ap-
proaches for preventing food waste (Zhu & Kouhizadeh, 2019). These 
technologies can help managing inventory and ordering along the sup-
ply chain for effective demand management. The online characteristics, 
given big data generation (Li, Chi, Hao, & Yu, 2018), support informa-
tion technology as a critical, NRBV-based, clean technology capability. 


Customers were surveyed for suggestions to minimize household 
salad waste; 97.5% of surveyed customers felt the online food retailer 
can help them minimize their salad food waste. Interestingly, about 45% 
of respondents stated that if the online food retailer offers smaller size 
packs of salads, they could waste less. A significant portion (i.e., 24%) of 
surveyed customers asked for extended salad product life. 


Customers (20%) also felt that alternative packaging can enhance the 
salad product life, including re-sealable salad bags and packaging to 
order. Other food waste minimization suggestions include educating 
customers on product storage and handling (6.1%); and improving 
product handling by the online food retailer so the product does not 
arrive to their households crushed (2.9%). 


Given these concerns, the online food retailer head of corporate re-
sponsibility and corporate affairs provided insights into responses: 


‘In our website, there are symbols that suggest the current storage practices 
of each product with the aim of extending product life. In particular, we give 
advice on when products can be frozen. Also, our company is planning to 
share more information on stock quantities and future demand with strategic 
suppliers with the aim of helping suppliers to reduce their own waste’. 


The case company found other potential actions in their processes, 
packaging, or approaches to help reduce downstream, customer food 
waste. Through the survey they realize that the level of customer waste 
can be quite substantial. Using pollution prevention and product stew-
ardship ideals with appropriate serving sizes identifies substantial win- 
win opportunities as espoused by NRBV. 


The supplier CSR manager, also chimed in with a summary of the in- 
process waste minimization efforts taking customer and supplier feed-
back into consideration: 


‘We are currently investing in a number of improvement projects that will 
lead to food waste reduction. They include technologies and models to make 
the supply forecast more accurate, more effective methods of capturing data 
that inform our food waste reduction decision making, more accurate waste 
composition analysis, more frequent food waste reporting around the busi-
ness. In particular, we are about to implement a new technology developed by 
Cambridge University capable of remote sensing and take pictures of crop 
plants that it can feed into a supply forecasting model to predict when the 
crops will be ready for harvesting’. 


Not only were sources of solutions from the customers and suppliers, 
but third-party stakeholders, the NGO partner, also provided feedback 
and solutions. The NGO food waste research manager stipulated: 


‘The online retailer and their fresh produce suppliers need to improve their 
communication and information sharing. They need to make their stock levels 
at the retailer visible to the supplier, and vice versa. This approach serves the 
purpose of increasing supplier order forecast accuracy; as well as, collabo-
rating on their reverse supply chains. These approaches help ensure that 
redistribution of food surplus is managed by applying a more joint approach. 
Food surplus can be redirected to other parts of the food retail supply chain, 
which currently does not happen’. 


The NGO food waste technical specialist expressed a slightly 
different view: 


‘It is the sole responsibility of the supplier to improve quality and con-
sistency of their production, match demand and supply, and improve the 
accuracy of their crop planning’. 


In both cases, the NGO recommended in-process solutions for pre-
vention by the supplier and the online retailer. The feedback included a 
product stewardship – reverse logistics – and clean technology – 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


13


information technology – alternatives. 
One such response is the online food retailer undertook supply chain 


simulation to estimate the potential reductions in stock levels and waste 
an improved supplier order forecast method could generate. The simu-
lation is based on a perishable inventory model (Nahmias, 1982). This 
model is suitable for salad products as it incorporates a fixed shelf life, 
and products must be purged afterwards. It also allows for a periodic 
(daily) order process, which is currently in use by the retailer. We as-
sume a first-in, first out system which means that the retailer always 
dispatches products with the shortest life remaining. In the improved 
method, the retailer adjusts the calculation of the safety stock level, an 
essential component in determining the order quantity. Specifically, the 
safety stock is calculated as a proportion of the standard deviation of 
forecast error, in contrast with the conventional method where it is a 
multiple of average demand. For performance evaluation, we measure 
several KPIs including the purge rate (ratio between purged products 
and total sales), availability (likelihood of demand being satisfied), 
average inventory level, and the amplification degree of inventory level 
and order quantity with respect to the sales. 


Table 7 summarizes the inventory system KPI for a sample of SKUs. 
Inventory fluctuations measured by inventory amplification reduce by 
48% due to the new order policy. Improvements in both the purge rate – 
reduced by 40% – and availability – increased by 2%, occur. The average 
inventory level also reduces by 43%. Meanwhile, the order fluctuation 
shows a mild reduction of 3.6%. The online retailer benefits without 
adding operational difficulty to the suppliers. 


The evidence shows some product stewardship improvements, by 
managing orders throughout a supply chain – using the clean technol-
ogy. It also exemplifies how various KPIs can help address multiple 
supply chain stakeholder needs, including lowered purge for commu-
nities and society, improved availability for customers, improved in-
ventory efficiency for the case company, and reduced order volatility for 
suppliers. 


Overall, we see that information management in an online supply 
chain requires information sharing and technology to aid in building and 
supporting its capabilities to reduce food waste along the supply chain. 
The literature has considered this as one of the important transitions in 
food waste management (Harvey, Smith, Goulding, & Illodo, 2019; 
Weymes & Davies, 2019). Information processing is critical to these 
items that result in the metrics and information necessary to manage the 
flows of wastes and materials. These results further confirm Proposition 
1, but we extend that proposition by adding an additional related 
research proposition building further on food waste management in-
formation needs in supply chains with an explicit linkage to NRBV ele-
ments (Lusiantoro et al., 2018; Miranda et al., 2019). 


Proposition 8. : Information processing and information sharing tools 
support food waste reduction in online food supply chain business en-
vironments. These tools can support product stewardship, clean tech-
nology, and pollution prevention capabilities. 


4. Discussion 


This section evaluates case study information in the mid-range the-
ory framework context, Fig. 1, informed by NRBV and critical success 
factor theories—later supported by stakeholder and organizational 


information processing theories. We take a closer look to determine 
what aspects of the framework may require refinement using case ana-
lyses details. We also seek to borrow from other theories, specifically 
stakeholder theory, to inform the mid-range theory framework. 


The mid-range theory developed and refined through the case study 
and various propositions, guides this discussion, highlighting similar-
ities and differences between the initial framework and case study 
findings. The factors affecting food waste, food waste metrics, food 
waste prevention and mitigation, and NRBV capabilities—product 
stewardship, pollution prevention and clean technologies – are evalu-
ated. The food waste metrics, mitigation end-of-pipe improvements, and 
minimization in-process solutions evaluation uses their level of imple-
mentation (Zhu & Sarkis, 2004). This evidence provides progress insight 
of the framework elements in relation to their implementation at the 
supplier and online food retailer. 


4.1. Factors affecting food waste 


A food waste factor comparative summary of case study factors and 
those mentioned in the literature appears in Table 8. 


Several food-waste generation factors from the previous literature 
exist in this study (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2015; Göbel et al., 2015; 
Mena et al., 2011; Vandermeersch et al., 2014). Product demand fore-
cast affectations, including weather, perishability, and customer buying 
and consumption behaviour are overlapping factors between the 
broader literature and this case study. The main factors affecting food 
waste – according to interviewed managers - are categorized as primary 
and less important factors as secondary. 


The supply, weather, product quality, and insufficient technology 
generate food waste. The suppliers, online retailer and the NGO each 
state that unpredictable demand from retailer decisions or weather are 
central food waste generating factors. The retailer, customer and NGO 
felt a short product shelf life policy contributes greatly to food waste 
since throughout the supply chain products are wasted due to very tight 
expiration dates. Such a strategy provides freshness to the customer at 
the expense of food waste generated at the supplier and customer ends. 


The literature does not explicitly mention supply forecasting as an 
important factor. This result contrasts with views of supplier managers 
and the NGO. They emphasize that it is one of the top food waste causes 
in the upstream supply chain. They strongly felt that food waste 
reduction relies on accurate forecasting. 


Proposition 9a. : Uncertainty and risk management through 
improved data capture, manipulation, and processing are needed for 
NRBV capability technological solutions in online food supply chain 
business environments. 


Proposition 9b. : Effective NRBV capabilities support both internal 
organizational and external supply chain partner and stakeholder 
requirements. 


Proposition 9c. : NRBV needs to consider supply chain and consider 
operational routines, not just strategic goals. 


The literature also ignores some supplier factors, inappropriate 
specification or quality failures and crop damage, are two such factors. 
The supplier manager considers them as secondary factors from their 
company’s perspective. The NGO felt these factors are important for all 
salad producers supplying UK retailers. 


4.2. Food waste metrics and relationships to stakeholders, causes, and 
capabilities 


Online food retailers can reduce their waste by improving their 
business practices and information sharing systems. The waste mea-
surement tool introduced earlier helps to achieve this goal. The metrics 
include KPIs from the three sustainability pillars, using elements of life 
cycle assessment. These KPIs support organizational and supply chain 


Table 7 
Simulation results of food SKUs under varying policies as identified by the in-
ventory decision support and simulation ‘clean technology’.   


Current policy Alternative policy 


Purge rate 4.955 2.970 
Availability 0.977 0.999 
Avg. inventory level (standardized) 1.000 0.573 
Inventory amplification 1.135 0.589 
Order amplification 1.136 1.095  


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


14


initiatives. Extant food waste studies do not consider online food re-
tailers from the perspective of the three pillars of sustainability and 
multi-stakeholders. Table 9 highlights stakeholder views on food waste 
metrics. 


In addition, stakeholders provided level of metrics adoption in the 
supply chain. There is some agreement on case study metrics accep-
tance, but differences also exist. 


The three NRBV capabilities have relationships with the set of food 
waste metrics. Links include pollution prevention that encourages more 
environmentally friendly behaviour across the supply chain. Clean 
technology advances in ICT integrate these metrics for supply chain 
measurement systems and product stewardship practices. Stakeholder 
coordination is also required for their implementation. 


Proposition 10. : Direct and indirect feedback relationships exist be-
tween stakeholders through the metrics used for monitoring and 
improvement and through NRBV capabilities. 


4.3. Food waste mitigation end-of-pipe, minimisation in-process solutions 
and NRBV capabilities 


The mid-range theory framework focuses on two types of supply 
chain food waste management activities, mitigation and minimization 
approaches. These approaches also link to the three NRBV capabilities. 
Implementations and pilot programs exist for the supply chain food 
waste management approaches in this case study. The metrics, stake-
holders, and waste causes relate to capabilities development; furthering 
support for Proposition 10. 


Table 10 shows the food waste mitigation end-of-pipe improvements 


and minimisation in-process activities identified for the three stages of 
the online food supply chain; supporting literature is also identified. 


There are several mitigation end-of-pipe improvements adopted in 
each supply chain stage. For example, the supplier and the online 
retailer manage food surplus by redistributing to charities, animal feed, 
and AD. The supplier and the NGO view AD as an effective way to reduce 
CO2e emissions generated from food waste. These organizations believe 
AD is a clean technology capability commonly applied by agri-food 
suppliers. 


The use of food surplus for AD and donation to charities are product 
stewardship and pollution prevention capabilities. These activities 
require transfer of ownership of food surplus. These activities mitigate 
emissions generated from food surplus transportation and decomposi-
tion. The supply chain partners consider redistribution of surplus to 
animal feed and making compost as product stewardship capabilities. 
The supplier managers and NGO believe these two tactics are not 
necessarily pollution prevention capabilities; mostly because their 
emissions mitigation effectiveness is rather limited. 


Several minimization in-process solutions appear in this study. The 
supplier has recently implemented technological advancements 
improving their supply forecasting methods, which consists of a supply 
forecasting system enhanced by new remote-sensing technology. The 
information helps predict supplier production quantities. The supply 
chain manager felt the forecasting system has a pollution prevention 
capability. The forecasting system application reduces their food surplus 
generation and transportation emissions. 


There are other food waste minimisation in-process solutions piloted 
along the online supply chain. The KPI metrics tool, described earlier in 
this paper, is under evaluation by the supplier and the retailer for other 


Table 8 
Factors found in the case study compared to previous literature.  


Factor Mentioned by Literature 


Supplier Online 
retailer 


Customer Non-for-profit 
consultancy 


Inaccurate supply forecast P N N P Not found 
Unpredictable demand caused by retailers or weather P P N P Mena et al. (2011) & Göbel et al. (2015) 
Lack of insufficient technology and advanced 


techniques 
S N N N Gardas et al. (2017) 


Short product shelf life N P P P Mena et al. (2011) 
Inappropriate pack sizes N N P P Mena et al. (2011) & Gardas et al. (2017) 
Customer’s buying behaviour N N P N Vandermeersch et al. (2014) & Aschemann-Witzel 


et al., 2015 
Customer’s consumption N N P N Aschemann-Witzel et al. (2015) & von Kameke and 


Fischer (2018) 
Customer’s eating habits N N P N Not found 
Crop damages caused by weather changes or pests S N N P Not found 
Inappropriate specifications or quality failures S N N P Not found 
Customers not educated on the implications of their 


buying behaviour 
N N N P Not found 


(P – Primary factor, S – Secondary factor and N – Not mentioned). 


Table 9 
Food waste metrics found in the case study compared to previous literature.  


Sustainability 
pillar 


Metric Mentioned by Example literature 


Supplier Online 
retailer 


NGO 
consultant 


Environmental Food waste ratio I I I León-Bravo et al. (2017) & De Lange and Nahman (2015) 
CO2e emissions per Kg of food waste P P P Tsagatakis et al. (2016) & Scherhaufer et al. (2017) 
Lt of water per Kg of food waste P P P Kummu et al., 2012 & Kibler et al. (2018) 


Economic Food surplus opportunity cost C P N Ridoutt et al. (2010) & Chaboud and Daviron (2017) 
Food surplus loss of sales C P N Vanham et al. (2015); Shafiee-Jood and Cai (2016) & Betz 


et al. (2015) 
Social Food donations I I I Alexander and Smaje (2008) 


Calories of food donated per food surplus 
quantity 


C N N Beretta et al. (2013) & Dreyer et al. (2019) 


Notes: I – Implemented successfully, P- Piloted, C- Currently considering, PC- Planning to consider and N – Not being considered. CO2e is carbon dioxide emissions 
equivalence. 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


15


fresh product families. The buyer and seller considered this solution as a 
clean technology capability for broad implementation. The technology 
enables accurate measurement of environmental, economic and social 
implications of their food surplus. They also view this solution as a 
product stewardship and pollution prevention capability, given the 
ownership of food surplus transfers across different supply chain stages. 
It enhances decision-making for food waste generated pollution 
reduction. 


There are three food waste minimization in-process solutions under 
consideration by the supplier and/or the retailer, namely more suitable 
product pack sizes, improved supplier order policy and greater 
supplier-retailer information sharing. 


The buyer and supplier are initiating a new project to evaluate 
alternative supplier order policies and an enhanced supplier-retailer 
information sharing system. These two solutions are effective for food 
waste reduction purposes (Gardas et al., 2017; Kaipia et al., 2013). 
Improved supplier order policies are a pollution prevention capability 
due to food-waste emissions reduction from food surplus minimization. 
Smaller surplus means fewer emissions generated from transportation 
and food surplus decomposition. 


The supplier is also piloting and testing alternative and more suitable 
packaging sizes to reduce customer food waste. This approach of effi-
cient package sizing is effective in food waste minimization practice 
(Gardas et al., 2017; Mena et al., 2011). 


We build on proposition 10 concerning various interactions among 
the food waste metrics, causes, and interactions with a general propo-
sition 11. This proposition also integrated stakeholder practices and 
their implementation. 


Proposition 11a. : There is an interaction between in-process and 
mitigation solutions with various NRBV capabilities. 


Proposition 11b. : Feedback mechanisms from NRBV capabilities 
help reduce food waste along the supply chain. 


The propositions and findings derived from this study help refine the 
original middle range theoretical framework linking NRBV, critical 
success factor, stakeholder and organizational information processing 
theory (Fig. 1). 


Overall, we found overlap between NRBV capabilities and that they 
are not mutually exclusive; while their adoption is influenced by mul-
tiple stakeholders across the supply chain. 


In addition, there are multiple interactions and feedback mecha-
nisms within and between practices, metrics, stakeholders that are used 
for monitoring and control purposes. We also found that there are sig-
nificant informational requirements to help reduce uncertainty and risks 
of food waste. Finally, another important characteristic is that opera-
tional and routine level analyses are needed for NRBV; NRBV is not just a 
strategic perspective. 


Fig. 7 presents the refined middle-range theory framework. 


5. Conclusions 


Food waste generated across a FSC is one of our world’s wicked 
problems. Multiple theories and methodologies are needed to inform 
and address this complex problem. We started with multiple theories to 
help derive an initial middle-range theory framework linking NRBV, 
critical success factor, stakeholder, and organizational information 
process theories. These theories, although typically applied at strategic 
and organizational levels of analysis, also have significant operational, 
supply level implications. 


A number of propositions, unsurprisingly some that were complex, 
emerged from our multiple methodologies and observations. Feedback 
from various partners in the supply chain through surveys and from 
semi-structured interviews helped to refine the framework and our un-
derstanding. We utilize data and findings from analytical and data tools 
to formulate additional insights. 


Together these multiple theories and methodologies resulted in a 
framework that shows a broader systemic and contingent set of re-
lationships. The complexity of the relationships, as identified in the 
propositions, require significantly more research. The propositions 
provide a stream of additional research by operations, supply chain, 
marketing, and information technology researchers to understand sup-
ply chain food waste; especially, in online food supply chains that 
generate and handle rich data sets. 


The major research contribution of this work is to advance NRBV to 
the supply chain and various complexities involved in food waste 
management. A resulting dynamic NRBV environment existed within 
this study. Dynamic capabilities were clearly evident and necessary in 
rapidly changing and emerging industrial contexts such as online food 
supply chains. 


The practical implications are many. For the sake of brevity, we 
identify three major managerial implications: 


Table 10 
Food waste mitigation end-of-pipe improvements and minimisation in-process solutions linkage to NRBV capabilities.   


Supporting 
literature 


Originated from Connected to 


Supplier Online 
food 
retailer 


Customer Pollution 
prevention 
capability 


Product 
stewardship 
capability 


Clean 
technology 


Food waste mitigation 
end-of-pipe 
improvements 


Donation of surplus to charities Mourad (2016) I I N/A X X  
Redistribution of surplus to 
animal feed 


Mourad (2016) I I I  X  


Usage of surplus for Anaerobic 
Digestion 


Xu et al. (2018) I I I X X X 


Making compost for local use Mourad (2016) I N I  X  
Food waste 


minimization in- 
process solutions 


Improved supply forecasting 
through technological 
advancements 


Kitinoja et al. 
(2018); Kiil et al. 
(2018) 


I N/A N/A X   


More accurate measurement 
and monitoring of food surplus 
and externalities 


Davies and Legg 
(2018) 


P P N/A X X X 


Improved supplier’s order 
policy 


Gardas et al. 
(2017) 


N/A C N/A X   


Greater supplier-retailer 
information sharing 


Kaipia et al. 
(2013) 


C C N/A X X  


More suitable product pack 
sizes 


Mena et al. (2011) P N N/A X   


(I – Implemented successfully, P - Piloted, C- Currently considering, PC - Planning to consider, N – Not being considered, and N/A – Not applicable). The “X” is a 
relationship marker between the solutions and the NRBV capabilities. 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            






Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


16


• Managers need to be aware of stakeholder needs and goals dispar-
ities. Supply chain positioning may require distinctions in food waste 
solutions. Understanding the needs and requirements can help build 
important practices, incentives and relationships.  


• Working across organizations and functions is necessary to provide 
comprehensive and effective solutions. For example, the role of in-
formation technology partners and relationships goes beyond the 
goal of profit in an online environment, but also of the need to utilize 
the data and information to help improve food waste management. 


• Metrics selection, food waste causes, and solutions need to be care-
fully evaluated and integrated. Continuous improvement and 
learning are necessary to keep updating and evaluating the moni-
toring tools, metrics, and relationships by management teams. 


This paper sets a foundation for additional research in food supply 
chains, but also in other supply chains based on online relationships. 
Although the players, technologies, and solutions may differ, we believe 
this general framework has applicability and can be further refined in 
general SSCM research. Additional theories can inform this environ-
ment. We limited this research investigation to just four theories. That is 
a limitation of this study. Although we used multiple methodologies, we 
used a single online food supply chain case study, there is a need for 
multi-case study research for generalisability purposes. Many other food 
waste reduction business models and approaches exist in e-commerce 
environments; for example, food-sharing supply chains, non-for-profit, 
and governmental waste exchange models are other examples. 
Whether the framework, propositions, solutions and perspectives exist 
in these other situations need investigation. 


Another limitation is the many complex relationships that exist. At 
present, we are in a general set of relationships and there is a question on 
how well this middle range theory can be translated into a simple and 
clear, testable theoretical framework. We do not offer a panacea for 
understanding SSCM, but it is an important step for helping industrial 
marketing, operations, and supply chain advancement in this field. 


Appendix A. Supplementary material 


Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020. 


References 


Alexander, C., & Smaje, C. (2008). Surplus retail food redistribution: an analysis of a 
third sector model. Resources Coservation and Recycling, 55(11), 1290–1298. 


Aschemann-Witzel, J., De Hooge, I., Amani, P., Bech-Larsen, T., & Oostindjer, M. (2015). 
Consumer-related food waste: causes and potential for action. Sustainability, 2015(7), 
6457–6477. 


Aschemann-Witzel, J., de Hooge, I., & Normann, A. (2016). Consumer-related food 
waste: role of food marketing and retailers and potential for action. Journal of 
International Food & Agribusiness Marketing, 28(3), 271–285. 


Aschemann-Witzel, J., De Hooge, I. E., Rohm, H., Normann, A., Bossle, M. B., 
Grønhøj, A., & Oostindjer, M. (2017). Key characteristics and success factors of 
supply chain initiatives tackling consumer-related food waste–A multiple case study. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 155, 33–45. 


Beretta, C., Stoessel, F., Baier, U., & Hellweg, S. (2013). Quantifying food losses and the 
potential for reduction in Switzerland. Waste Management, 33(3), 764–773. 


Beske, P., Land, A., & Seuring, S. (2014). Sustainable supply chain management practices 
and dynamic capabilities in the food industry: a critical analysis of the literature. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 152, 131–143. 


Fig. 7. Refined middle-range theoretic framework linking NRBV, critical success factor, stakeholder, and organizational information processing theories with case 
study propositions. 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0035




Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


17


Betz, A., Buchli, J., Göbel, C., & Müller, C. (2015). Food waste in the Swiss food service 
industry–magnitude and potential for reduction. Waste Management, 35, 218–226. 


Brindley, B., & Oxborrow, L. (2014). Aligning the sustainable supply chain to green 
marketing needs: a case study. Industrial Marketing Management, 43(1), 45–55. 


Bundy, J., Vogel, R. M., & Zachary, M. A. (2018). Organization–stakeholder fit: a 
dynamic theory of cooperation, compromise, and conflict between an organization 
and its stakeholders. Strategic Management Journal, 39(2), 476–501. 


Carter, C. R., & Rogers, D. S. (2008). A framework of sustainable supply chain 
management: moving toward new theory. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution and Logistics Management, 38(5), 360–387. 


Chaboud, G., & Daviron, B. (2017). Food losses and waste: navigating the 
inconsistencies. Global Food Security, 12, 1–7. 


Curran, M. A. (1996). Environmental life-cycle assessment. The International Journal of 
Life Cycle Assessment, 1(3), 179. 


Davies, A. R., & Legg, R. (2018). Fare sharing: interrogating the nexus of ICT, urban food 
sharing, and sustainability. Food Culture & Society, 21(2), 233–254. 


De Lange, W., & Nahman, A. (2015). Costs of food waste in South Africa: incorporating 
inedible food waste. Waste Management, 40, 167–172. 


Dreyer, H., Dukovska-Popovska, I., Yu, Q., & Hedenstierna, C. (2019). A ranking method 
for prioritising retail store food waste based on monetary and environmental 
impacts. Journal of Cleaner Production, 210(10), 505–517. 


Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qualitative 
Inquiry, 12(2), 219–245. 


Food Loss + Waste Protocol. (2016). Food loss and waste accounting and reporting 
standard. http://flwprotocol.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/FLW_Standard_Exe 
c_Summary_final_2016.pdf (Accessed on 30/04/2019). 


Frankle, R., Naslund, D., & Bolumole, Y. (2005). The “white space” of logistics research: a 
look at the role of methods usage. Journal of Business Logistics, 26(2), 185–208. 


Freeman, R. E. (1984). Stakeholder management: framework and philosophy, Pitman, 
Mansfield, MA. 


Galbraith, J. R. (1973). Designing complex organizations. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  
Garcia-Garcia, G., Stone, J., & Rahimifard, S. (2019). Opportunities for waste 


valorisation in the food industry–A case study with four UK food manufacturers. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 211, 1339–1356. 


Gardas, B., Raut, R., & Narkhede, B. (2017). Modeling causal factors of post-harvesting 
losses in vegetable and fruit supply chain: An Indian perspective. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 80, 1355–1371. 


Garnett, T. (2011). Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions in the food system (including the food chain)? Food Policy, 36, S23–S32. 


Gattiker, T. F., & Goodhue, D. L. (2004). Understanding the local-level costs and benefits 
of ERP through organizational information processing theory. Information & 
Management, 41(4), 431–443. 


George, A. L., Bennett, A., Lynn-Jones, S. M., & Miller, S. E. (2005). Case studies and 
theory development in the social sciences. Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press.  


Göbel, C., Langen, N., Blumenthal, A., Teitscheid, P., & Ritter, G. (2015). Cutting food 
waste through cooperation along the food supply chain. Sustainability, 2015(7), 
1429–1445. 


Graham, S., Graham, B., & Holt, D. (2018). The relationship between downstream 
environmental logistics practices and performance. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 196, 356–365. 


Graham, S., & Potter, A. (2015). Environmental operations management and its links 
with proactivity and performance: a study of the UK food. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 170(Part A), 146–159. 


Grimm, J. H., Hofstetter, J. S., & Sarkis, J. (2014). Critical factors for sub-supplier 
management: a sustainable food supply chains perspective. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 152, 159–173. 


Groening, C., Sarkis, J., & Zhu, Q. (2018). Green marketing consumer-level theory 
review: a compendium of applied theories and further research directions. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 172, 1848–1866. 


Hart, S. L. (1995). A natural-resource-based view of the firm. Academy of Management 
Review, 20(4), 986–1014. 


Hart, S. L., & Dowell, G. (2011). Invited editorial: a natural-resource-based view of the 
firm: fifteen years after. Journal of Management, 37(5), 1464–1479. 


Harvey, J., Smith, A., Goulding, J., & Illodo, I. B. (2019). Food sharing, redistribution, 
and waste reduction via mobile applications: a social network analysis. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 88, 437–448. 


Islam, S., Tseng, M. L., & Karia, N. (2019). Assessment of corporate culture in 
sustainability performance using a hierarchical framework and interdependence 
relations. Journal of Cleaner Production, 217(20), 676–690. 


Jack, E. P., & Raturi, A. S. (2006). Lessons learned from methodological triangulation in 
management research. Management Research News, 29(6), 345–357. 


Kaipia, R., Dukovska-Popovska, I., & Loikkanen, L. (2013). Creating sustainable fresh 
food supply chains through waste reduction. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution and Logistics Management, 43(3), 262–276. 


Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Arha, H. (2019). Understanding the Blockchain 
technology adoption in supply chains-Indian context. International Journal of 
Production Research, 7, 2009–2033. 


von Kameke, C., & Fischer, D. (2018). Preventing household food waste via nudging: an 
exploration of consumer perceptions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 184, 32–40. 


Kibler, K. M., Reinhart, D., Hawkins, C., Motlagh, A. M., & Wright, J. (2018). Food waste 
and the food-energy-water nexus: a review of food waste management alternatives. 
Waste Management, 74, 52–62. 


Kiil, K., Dreyer, H. C., Hvolby, H. H., & Chabada, L. (2018). Sustainable food supply 
chains: the impact of automatic replenishment in grocery stores. Production Planning 
and Control, 29(2), 106–116. 


Kitinoja, L., Tokala, V. Y., & Brondy, A. (2018). Challenges and opportunities for 
improved postharvest loss measurements in plant-based food crops. Journal of 
Postharvest Technology, 6(4), 16–34. 


Kummu, M., De Moel, H., Porkka, M., Siebert, S., Varis, O., & Ward, P. J. (2012). Lost 
food, wasted resources: global food supply chain losses and their impacts on 
freshwater, cropland, and fertiliser use. Science of the Total Environment, 438, 
477–489. 


Lehtokunnas, T., Mattila, M., Närvänen, E., & Mesiranta, N. (2020). Towards a circular 
economy in food consumption: food waste reduction practices as ethical work. 
Journal of Consumer Culture, 1469540520926252. 


León-Bravo, V., Caniato, F., & Caridi, M. (2019). Sustainability in multiple stages of the 
food supply chain in Italy: practices, performance and reputation. Operations 
Management Research, 12(1–2), 40–61. 


León-Bravo, V., Caniato, F., Caridi, M., & Johnsen, T. (2017). Collaboration for 
sustainability in the food supply chain: a multi-stage study in Italy. Sustainability, 
2017(9), 1253. 


Li, L., Chi, T., Hao, T., & Yu, T. (2018). Customer demand analysis of the electronic 
commerce supply chain using Big Data. Annals of Operations Research, 268(1–2), 
113–128. 


Lin, C. S. K., Pfaltzgraff, L. A., Herrero-Davila, L., Mubofu, E. B., Abderrahim, S., 
Clark, J. H., … Luque, R. (2013). Food waste as a valuable resource for the 
production of chemicals, materials and fuels. Current situation and global 
perspective. Energy and Environmental Science, 6(2), 426–464. 


Lusiantoro, L., Yates, N., Mena, C., & Varga, L. (2018). A refined framework of 
information sharing in perishable product supply chains. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 48(3), 254–283. 


McDougall, N., Wagner, B., & MacBryde, J. (2016). Exploring dynamic natural-resource- 
based capabilities for sustainable agri-food chain. Sustainable Design and 
Manufacturing, 455-465. 


Mena, C., Adenso-Diaz, B., & Yurt, O. (2011). The causes of food waste in the 
supplier–retailer interface: evidences from the UK and Spain. Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling, 55, 648–658. Issue 6, April 2011. 


Mena, J. A., Hult, G. T. M., Ferrell, O. C., & Zhang, Y. (2019). Competing assessments of 
market-driven, sustainability-centered, and stakeholder-focused approaches to the 
customer-brand relationships and performance. Journal of Business Research, 95, 
531–543. 


Meredith, J. (1993). Theory building through conceptual methods. International Journal 
of Operations & Production Management, 13, 3–11. 


Miranda, J., Ponce, P., Molina, A., & Wright, P. (2019). Sensing, smart and sustainable 
technologies for agri-food 4.0. Computers in Industry, 108, 21–36. 


de Moraes, C. C., de Oliveira Costa, F. H., Pereira, C. R., da Silva, A. L., & Delai, I. (2020). 
Retail food waste: mapping causes and reduction practices. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 256, 120124. 


Mourad, M. (2016). Recycling, recovering and preventing “food waste”: competing 
solutions for food systems sustainability in the United States and France. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 126, 461–477. 


Muth, M. K., Birney, C., Cuéllar, A., Finn, S. M., Freeman, M., Galloway, J. N., … 
Meyer, E. (2019). A systems approach to assessing environmental and economic 
effects of food loss and waste interventions in the United States. Science of the Total 
Environment, 685, 1240–1254. 


Nahmias, S. (1982). Perishable inventory theory: a review. Operations Research, 30(4), 
680–708. 


Papargyropoulou, E., Lozano, R., Steinberger, J., Wright, N., & Ujang, Z. (2014). The 
food waste hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and food 
waste. Journal of Cleaner Production, 76, 106–115. 


Pereira, L., & Drimie, S. (2016). Governance arrangements for the future food system: 
addressing complexity in South Africa. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable 
Development, 58(4), 18–31. 


Perey, R., Benn, S., Agarwal, R., & Edwards, M. (2018). The place of waste: changing 
business value for the circular economy. Business Strategy and the Environment, 27(5), 
631–642. 


Ridoutt, B., Juliano, P., Sanguansri, P., & Sellahewa, J. (2010). The water footprint of 
food waste: case study of fresh mango in Australia. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18 
(16/17), 1714–1721. 


Saberi, S., Kouhizadeh, M., Sarkis, J., & Shen, L. (2018). Blockchain technology and its 
relationships to sustainable supply chain management. International Journal of 
Production Research, 1–19. 


Scherhaufer, S., Moates, M., Hartikainen, H., Waldron, K., & Obersteiner, G. (2017). 
Environmental impacts of food waste in Europe. Waste Management, 77, 98–113. 


Sellitto, M. A., Vial, L. A. M., & Viegas, C. V. (2018). Critical success factors in short food 
supply chains: case studies with milk and dairy producers from Italy and Brazil. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 170, 1361–1368. 


Seuring, S. (2011). Supply chain management for sustainable products–insights from 
research applying mixed methodologies. Business Strategy and the Environment, 20(7), 
471–484. 


Shafiee-Jood, M., & Cai, X. (2016). Reducing food loss and waste to enhance food 
security and environmental sustainability. Environmental Science & Technology, 50 
(16), 8432–8443. 


Shankar, R., Gupta, R., & Pathak, D. K. (2018). Modeling critical success factors of 
traceability for food logistics system. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and 
Transportation Review, 119, 205–222. 


Spada, A., Conte, A., & Del Nobile, M. A. (2018). The influence of shelf life on food waste: 
a model-based approach by empirical market evidence. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
172, 3410–3414. 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0090

http://flwprotocol.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/FLW_Standard_Exec_Summary_final_2016.pdf

http://flwprotocol.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/FLW_Standard_Exec_Summary_final_2016.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf5000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf5000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf3000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf3000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf3000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0365




Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx


18


Teigiserova, D. A., Hamelin, L., & Thomsen, M. (2020). Towards transparent valorization 
of food surplus, waste and loss: clarifying definitions, food waste hierarchy, and role 
in the circular economy. Science of the Total Environment, 706, 136033. 


The Independent. (2015). How much food does the EU waste?. https://www.independen 
t.co.uk/news/world/europe/how-much-food-does-the-eu-waste-a6778351.html 
(Accessed on 30/04/2019). 


Thyberg, K., & Tonjes, D. J. (2016). Drivers of food waste and their implications for 
sustainable policy development. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 106, 
110–123. 


Tsagatakis, I., Brace, S., Jephcote, C., Passant, N., Pearson, B., Kiff, B., & Fraser, A. 
(2016). Report: UK emission mapping methodology 2014. UK Air, DEFRA.  


UN FAO. (2019). Food Loss and Food Waste, Food & Agricultural Organisation of the 
United Nations. http://www.fao.org/food-loss-and-food-waste/en/ (Accessed on 1st 
March, 2019). 


Vandermeersch, T., Alvarenga, R., Ragaert, P., & Dewulf, J. (2014). Environmental 
sustainability assessment of food waste valorization options. Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling, 87, 57–64. 


Vanham, D., Bouraoui, F., Leip, A., Grizzetti, B., & Bidoglio, G. (2015). Lost water and 
nitrogen resources due to EU consumer food waste. Environmental Research Letters, 
10(8), 1–15. 


Wang, J., Huili, Y., & Goh, M. (2018). Empirical study of sustainable food supply chain 
management practices in China. British Food Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ- 
09-2017-0525. 


Weick, K. E. (1989). Theory construction as disciplined imagination. Academy of 
Management Review, 14(4), 516–531. 


Weymes, M., & Davies, A. R. (2019). [Re] valuing surplus: transitions, technologies and 
tensions in redistributing prepared food in San Francisco. Geoforum, 99, 160–169. 


WRAP. (2018). The Courtauld 2025 baseline and restated household food waste figures, 
22/Oct/2018. http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/courtauld-2025-baseline-and 
-restated-household-food-waste-figures (Accessed on 30/04/2019). 


Xu, F., Li, Y., Ge, X., Yang, L., & Li, Y. (2018). Anaerobic digestion of food 
waste–Challenges and opportunities. Bioresource Technology, 247, 1047–1058. 


Yadav, S., Garg, D., & Luthra, S. (2020). Development of IoT based data-driven 
agriculture supply chain performance measurement framework. Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-11-2019-0369. 


Yin, R. (2009). Applications of case study research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publishing.  
Zhu, Q., & Kouhizadeh, M. (2019). Blockchain technology, supply chain information, and 


strategic product deletion management. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 47(1), 
36–44. 


Zhu, Q., & Sarkis, J. (2004). Relationships between operational practices and 
performance among early adopters of green supply chain management practices in 
Chinese manufacturing enterprises. Journal of Operations Management, 22, 265–289. 


V.S. Rodrigues et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0370

https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/how-much-food-does-the-eu-waste-a6778351.html

https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/how-much-food-does-the-eu-waste-a6778351.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf4000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf4000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf4000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0380

http://www.fao.org/food-loss-and-food-waste/en/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0395

https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-09-2017-0525

https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-09-2017-0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0410

http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/courtauld-2025-baseline-and-restated-household-food-waste-figures

http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/courtauld-2025-baseline-and-restated-household-food-waste-figures

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0420

https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-11-2019-0369

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf2000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(20)30851-8/rf0440


