









Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Expert Systems With Applications 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa 


Resilient supplier selection in logistics 4.0 with heterogeneous 
information 
Md Mahmudul Hasan a , Dizuo Jiang a , A.M.M. Sharif Ullah b , Md. Noor-E-Alam a , ∗
a Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA 
b School of Regional Innovation and Social Design Engineering, Kitami Institute of Technology, 165 Koen-cho, Kitami, Hokkaido 090-8507, Japan 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 22 April 2019 
Revised 29 June 2019 
Accepted 8 July 2019 
Available online 13 July 2019 
Keywords: 
Logistic 4.0 
Resilience 
Supplier selection 
Supplier’s Cost versus Resilience Index 
(SCRI) 
TOPSIS 
Fuzzy Multi-Attribute Decision Making 
(F-MADM) 


a b s t r a c t 
Supplier selection problem has gained extensive attention in the prior studies. However, research based 
on Fuzzy Multi-Attribute Decision Making (F-MADM) approach in ranking resilient suppliers in logistic 4.0 
is still in its infancy. Traditional MADM approach fails to address the resilient supplier selection problem 
in logistic 4.0 primarily because of the large amount of data concerning some attributes that are quan- 
titative, yet difficult to process while making decisions. Besides, some qualitative attributes prevalent in 
logistic 4.0 entail imprecise perceptual or judgmental decision relevant information, and are substantially 
different than those considered in traditional suppler selection problems. This study develops a Deci- 
sion Support System (DSS) that will help the decision maker to incorporate and process such imprecise 
heterogeneous data in a unified framework to rank a set of resilient suppliers in the logistic 4.0 environ- 
ment. The proposed framework induces a triangular fuzzy number from large-scale temporal data using 
probability-possibility consistency principle. Large number of non-temporal data presented graphically 
are computed by extracting granular information that are imprecise in nature. Fuzzy linguistic variables 
are used to map the qualitative attributes. Finally, fuzzy based TOPSIS method is adopted to generate 
the ranking score of alternative suppliers. These ranking scores are used as input in a Multi-Choice Goal 
Programming (MCGP) model to determine optimal order allocation for respective suppliers. Finally, a sen- 
sitivity analysis assesses how the Supplier’s Cost versus Resilience Index (SCRI) changes when differential 
priorities are set for respective cost and resilience attributes. 


© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
1. Introduction 


With the increasing requirements for industrial process due 
to technological revolution, companies are facing rigorous chal- 
lenges such as competitive global industry, increasing market un- 
predictability, swelling customized product demands and short- 
ened product renewal cycle ( Hofmann & Rüsch, 2017 ). Aligned 
with the demanding industry, the fourth wave of technological in- 
novation has been materialized, known as Industry 4.0. It refers to 
so-called fourth industrial revolution in discrete and process man- 
ufacturing, logistics and supply chain (Logistics 4.0), energy (En- 
ergy 4.0) etc., which is resulted due to the digital transformation 
of industrial markets (industrial transformation) integrated with 
smart manufacturing. Powered by foundational technology such as 
autonomous robots, simulation, cyber security, the cloud and addi- 
tive manufacturing ( Rüßmann et al., 2015 ), Industry 4.0 improves 


∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: hasan.mdm@husky.neu.edu (M.M. Hasan), 


jiang.di@husky.neu.edu (D. Jiang), ullah@mail.kitami-it.ac.jp (A.M.M.S. Ullah), 
mnalam@neu.edu (Md. Noor-E-Alam). 


the manufacturing systems to an intelligent level that takes advan- 
tage of advanced information and manufacturing technologies to 
achieve flexible, smart, and reconfigurable manufacturing processes 
in order to address a dynamic and global market ( Zhong, Xu, Klotz 
& Newman, 2017 ). 


As an essential and significant part of Industry 4.0, Logis- 
tics 4.0 concerns the various aspects of end-to-end logistics in 
the context of Industry 4.0, the Internet of Things (IoT), cyber- 
physical systems, automation, big data, cloud computing, and In- 
formation technology ( Hofmann & Rüsch, 2017; i-SCOOP, 2017a; 
Rüßmann et al., 2015; Zhong et al., 2017 ). Logistics 4.0 aims to 
develop a smart logistics system to fulfill the customer require- 
ments in the current connected, digitalized and rapidly changing 
global logistics market ( i-SCOOP, 2017b ). To adopt with an Indus- 
try 4.0 environment, extensive cutting-edge applications have been 
landed within logistics 4.0. Juhász and Bányai (2018) identified 
challenges of just-in-sequence supply in the automotive industry 
from the aspect of Industry 4.0 solutions and detected impacts of 
Industry 4.0 paradigm on just-in-sequence supply. Ivanov, Dolgui, 
Sokolov, Werner and Ivanova (2016) proposed a dynamic model 
and algorithm for short-term supply chain scheduling problem that 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.016 
0957-4174/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.016





http://www.ScienceDirect.com

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.016&domain=pdf

mailto:hasan.mdm@husky.neu.edu

mailto:jiang.di@husky.neu.edu

mailto:ullah@mail.kitami-it.ac.jp

mailto:mnalam@neu.edu

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.016




2 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
simultaneously considered both machine structure selection 
and job assignments in smart factories. Brettel, Friederichsen, 
Keller and Rosenberg (2014) visualized the supply chain process 
by introducing cyber-physical systems to bridge the advanced com- 
munication between machines on the landscape of Industry 4.0. 


With higher priority on customer satisfaction, incremental at- 
tention has been drawn to the availability, reliability, flexibility 
and agility of the logistics system ( Barreto, Amaral & Pereira, 
2017; Witkowski, 2017 ). Unpredictable natural catastrophes or un- 
expected man-made disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, labor 
strikes and bankruptcy engender serious threat to the capabil- 
ity of the logistics system on these aspects. Despite of low oc- 
currence probability, the tremendous financial impacts of the dis- 
ruptions in any form on the logistics system are much more ob- 
vious. Renesas Electronics Corporation, a Japanese semiconductor 
manufacturer and the world’s largest manufacturer of microcon- 
trollers is an industry 4.0 company. They launched the R-IN32M4- 
CL2 industrial Ethernet communication specific standard product 
(ASSP) with integrated Gigabit PHY to support the increasing net- 
work and productivity for Industry 4.0 companies on June 25, 2015 
( Corporation, 2015 ). In earthquake and tsunami that struck the 
northeast coast of Japan on March 2011, the corporation’s Naka 
Factory and other manufacturing facilities were severely damaged 
by the earthquake. The total losses caused by the disaster was 
814.2 million USD, even though the insurance covered 198.9 mil- 
lion USD ( Abe & Ye, 2012 ). UPS, the leading logistics company, 
which has achieved great advancement in the fields of digitalized 
logistics system and smart factory in the wave of Industry 4.0, suf- 
fers from the lack of resilient supply chain as well. During the hur- 
ricane Florence that threatened the east coast in mid-September 
2018, the delivery rate reduced to 50% with thousands of delivery 
exceptions ( SUPPLYCHAINDIVE, 2018 ). 


To withstand against disruption a resilient supplier is indis- 
pensable in the sourcing decision process while operating under 
the principles of logistics 4.0. A resilient supplier usually has high 
adaptive capability to reduce the vulnerability against disruptions, 
absorb disaster impact and quickly recover from disruption to en- 
sure desired level of continuity in operations following a disaster 
( Sheffi, 2005; Sheffi & Rice, 2005 ). To comprehensively evaluate 
the alternatives and select the optimal supplier, diverse factors are 
needed to be taken into consideration. Several proactive strategies 
such as suppliers’ business continuity plans, fortification of suppli- 
ers, maintaining contract with back up suppliers, single and multi- 
ple sourcing, spot purchasing, collaboration and visibility are con- 
sidered to enhance supply chain resilience in the presence of oper- 
ational and disruption risks ( Namdar, Li, Sawhney & Pradhan, 2018; 
Torabi, Baghersad & Mansouri, 2015 ). Another study suggests that 
suppliers’ reliability, and flexibility in production capacity play key 
role in developing contingency plans to help mitigate the severity 
of disruptions ( Kamalahmadi & Mellat-Parast, 2016 ). Criteria such 
as supply chain complexity, supplier resource flexibility, buffer ca- 
pacity and responsiveness were considered in traditional resilient 
supplier selection problem ( Haldar, Ray, Banerjee & Ghosh, 2012, 
2014 ). However, to select the resilient supplier in logistics 4.0 en- 
vironment, additional aspects are required to be taken into consid- 
eration regarding the features of logistics 4.0. 


In logistics 4.0, most of the companies and related organizations 
are adopting end-to-end information sharing technologies because 
the amount of data produced and shared through the supply chain 
is significantly increasing ( Domingo Galindo, 2016 ; G. Wang, Gu- 
nasekaran, Ngai & Papadopoulos, 2016 ). Driven by the extensive 
practical and efficient attributes, numerous applications of big data 
are employed in delivery forecasting, optimal routing, and produc- 
tivity monitoring and labor reduction ( Waller & Fawcett, 2013 ). 
Making well-informed decisions in sourcing process also involves 
a variety of massive data-based logistics aspects evaluation such 


as delivery lead time, inventory level, production capacity, and op- 
erational investment. Information sources such as ERP transaction 
data, GPS-enabled data, machine-generated data and RFID data 
are frequently transferred, stored and retrieved through the logis- 
tics system, which require massive data manipulation methodology 
( Rozados & Tjahjono, 2014 ). 


With the widespread use of IoT, cyber-physical systems, and In- 
formation technology, attention has been given on the supplier’s 
performance and ability in responding to changing customer de- 
mand with agility, warehouse automation, logistics system digital- 
ization, information management and IT security, etc. The relevant 
data from these fields are generally collected in various formats 
at quick velocity, and entails large volume—all-together leads to 
Big Data, which is often available as real-time and historical data. 
Data that are collected in real-time is characterized by time series 
whereas historical data is often presented in graphical format. At- 
tributes that entail large amount of information in logistics 4.0 are 
inventory level, schedule of delivery, production capacity, cost etc. 
Processing these large amounts of data requires a formal computa- 
tion process that can enable decision maker to efficiently evaluate 
alternative decisions. 


Therefore, for selecting resilient suppliers in logistics 4.0, a 
decision-making framework is needed given the extensive impact 
of sourcing decision on the supply chain resiliency, efficiency and 
sustainability. The decision problem involves evaluation of several 
alternative suppliers against multiple conflicting criteria. Moreover, 
this problem even becomes more complicated when the decision 
relevant information (DRI) are in heterogeneous form such as qual- 
itative information that are imprecise in nature and vague some- 
times, and large number of quantitative information that are dif- 
ficult to process. To address this problem, we propose a Decision 
Support System (DSS) leveraging the principle of Multi-Attribute 
Decision Making (MADM) to rank alternative suppliers from re- 
silience and logistic 4.0 perspectives. 


The key contributions of this study are: 
i. As the existing research on MADM has limited applicabil- 


ity in the logistics 4.0 environment, we, for the first time 
extend the F-MADM framework to logistics 4.0 industries 
where selecting resilient suppliers has far reaching conse- 
quence. The proposed DSS is capable of handling qualitative 
attributes that entails imprecise DRI, and are substantially 
different than those considered in traditional supplier selec- 
tion problem. Moreover, our plan is to integrate large num- 
ber of quantitative DRI, which in logistics 4.0 environment 
is characterized by time series and graphical information. As 
such, we propose an integrated decision-making framework 
to process this heterogeneous information in a seamlessly 
unified framework to facilitate the resilient supplier selec- 
tion process for a logistics 4.0 industry. 


ii. Commonly used fuzzy based TOPSIS technique solely de- 
pends on the standard triangular linguistic class to handle 
the qualitative appraisal in the decision making process and 
lacks the sophistication in processing the quantitative infor- 
mation. Our proposed DSS overcomes this limitation by suc- 
cessfully converting and integrating the crisp granular infor- 
mation extracted from graphically presented data into tri- 
angular fuzzy based TOPSIS decision matrix. Crisp granu- 
lar or c-granular information refers to the pieces of infor- 
mation entailing well–defined crisp or ill-defined percep- 
tual boundary consisting of sharp numbers ( Ullah & Noor- 
E-Alam, 2018 ; Zadeh, 1997 ). 


iii. Selecting suppliers by considering all attributes that share 
equal preference usually generate inflated set of ranking 
score which is generic, however, sometimes fails to address 
the issue if a decision maker wants to put more importance 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 3 
on one set of criteria than another. We divide the attributes 
in two sets—mainly based on measure of resilience and 
cost—used as efficiency measure. We further demonstrate 
the capability of the proposed DSS to generate Supplier’s 
Cost versus Resilience Index (SCRI) based on customized 
preference given by the decision makers on cost and re- 
silience attributes. 


iv. We also extend the proposed DSS with the help of an or- 
der allocation model leveraging Multi-Choice Goal Program- 
ming (MCGP) technique. The optimal suppliers identified 
with the help of F-MADM approach are only suitable for 
single-sourcing problems in which the procurement quan- 
tity can be satisfied by a single supplier. However, in a sit- 
uation where procurement demand cannot be fulfilled by a 
single supplier, and strategic decision makers want to diver- 
sify their market, stabilize their sourcing channels while dis- 
tributing risks on multiple suppliers and drive up competi- 
tiveness, allocating orders among competitive suppliers can 
turn out to be a viable strategy. As such, our framework will 
empower decision makers to allocate orders among alterna- 
tive suppliers by taking into account the ranking of individ- 
ual suppliers that has been generated via F-MADM approach. 


The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 , 
we review the relevant literatures. Then in Section 3 and 4 , we 
present the theoretical concept needed to design the decision- 
making framework. Section 5 describes the proposed DSS for sup- 
pler evaluation and order allocation problem. In Section 6 , we il- 
lustrate the effectiveness of the proposed DSS via a case study. Fi- 
nally, in Section 7 we conclude the work conducted in this study 
with future research directions. 
2. Literature review 


Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) approaches are widely 
adopted in the fields of transportation, immigration, educa- 
tion, investment, environment, energy, defense and healthcare 
( Devlin, Sussex & Economics, 2011; Dodgson, Spackman, Pearman 
& Phillips, 2009; Gregory et al., 2012; Mühlbacher, Kaczynski & 
policy, 2016; Nutt, King & Phillips, 2010; Wahlster, Goetghebeur, 
Kriza, Niederländer & Kolominsky-Rabas, 2015 ). Howard and Ralph 
( Raiffa & Keeney, 1975 ) first introduce MCDA as a methodology 
for evaluating alternatives based on individual preference, often 
against conflicting criteria, and combining them into one single 
appraisal. Prior studies have also applied MCDA approach to se- 
lect suppliers using multiple attributes ( Lo & Liou, 2018; Ren, Xu & 
Wang, 2018; Sodenkamp, Tavana & Di Caprio, 2018 ). Multi-Criteria 
Decision Making (MCDM) with grey numbers was used to pro- 
pose a conceptual framework for suppliers’ management entail- 
ing selection, segmentation and development of resilient suppli- 
ers ( Valipour Parkouhi, Safaei Ghadikolaei & Fallah Lajimi, 2019 ). 
They used Grey DEMATEL technique to weigh the criteria consid- 
ered for the two dimensions of resilience enhancer and resilience 
reducer. Finally, Grey Simple Additive Weighting (GSAW) technique 
was used to determine the ranking score of each supplier accord- 
ing to each dimension. 


As one of the most prevalent MCDA approaches, Analytical Hi- 
erarchy Process (AHP) has been widely adopted to address supplier 
selection problems ( De Felice, Deldoost & Faizollahi, 2015; Prasad, 
Prasad, Rao & Patro, 2016 ). Saaty (1980) at first proposed the 
methodology of AHP, which was then refined by Golden, Wasil and 
Harker (1989) . In AHP method, the feature of original data set is 
usually qualitative. In decision-making process, the master problem 
is decomposed to sub-problems, making the unidirectional hier- 
archical relationships between levels more understandable. Based 
on the subdivisions, pairwise comparison between alternatives is 


conducted to determine the importance of the criteria and priority 
over all alternatives. During this decision-making process, the eval- 
uation of alternatives is extended to qualitative field while multiple 
criteria are considered, and the consistency of the system is satis- 
fied. However, due to the subjectivity of the qualitative informa- 
tion resulted from the discrepancy of decision makers’ experience, 
knowledge and judgment, the uncertainty and imprecise nature in 
the data are not dealt with, which may impair the reliability and 
robustness of the result. 


To help the stakeholders establish a more accurate and reli- 
able approach, Yoon (1987 ) and Hwang, Lai & Liu (1993 ) devel- 
oped TOPSIS (Technique for order preference by similarity to an 
ideal solution). The underlying idea is that the optimal solution 
should have the closest distance from the Positive Ideal Solution 
(PIS) and longest distance from the Negative Ideal Solution (NIS). 
TOPSIS can handle quantitative input data, which is different from 
the basic feature of AHP. Because of its precise nature, TOPSIS has 
been broadly applied in supplier selection problem. Shahroudi and 
Tonekaboni (2012) adopted TOPSIS in the supplier selection pro- 
cess in Iran Auto Supply Chain, in which both the numerical and 
linguistic evaluation criteria are considered to determine the pref- 
erential alternatives. In this study, numerical numbers (without 
consideration of fuzziness of data set) are assigned to qualitative 
data directly to generate the quantitative decision matrix for TOP- 
SIS. To develop an integrated decision-making framework, some 
group of researchers aggregated AHP with TOPSIS to better eval- 
uate the alternative suppliers ( Bhutia & Phipon, 2012; Ş ahin & 
Yi ̆gider, 2014 ). However, most of these methods utilized crisp in- 
formation, and thus uncertainty, impreciseness and fuzziness na- 
ture of the judgmental information are not considered. 


To obtain better results in problems where decision making 
and analysis are significantly affected by the uncertainty inher- 
ent in the DRI, the fuzzy technique was introduced. Gan, Zhong, 
Liu and Yang (2019) used fuzzy Best-Worst Method (BWM) to de- 
termine the decision makers’ weight and modular TOPSIS to sort 
and rank alternative suppliers form resiliency perspective in a ran- 
dom and group decision making framework. Haldar, Ray, Baner- 
jee and Ghosh (2014) integrated Triangular and trapezoidal linguis- 
tic data to select resilient suppliers using TOPSIS. However, the cri- 
teria used in these two studies were based on traditional supply 
chain, which are not sufficient to comprehensively evaluate suppli- 
ers from the perspective of logistics 4.0 and resiliency, simultane- 
ously. Moreover, while evaluating suppliers they did not consider 
the quantitative decision relevant information, which is often avail- 
able for several attributes considered in case of logistics 4.0. 


Atanassov (1999) , at first defined the concept and prop- 
erties of Intuitionistic fuzzy set, which was then adopted by 
Boran, Genç, Kurt and Akay (2009) and to the aggregated decision- 
making framework in supplier selection problem. Wang, Smaran- 
dache, Sunderraman and Zhang (2005) and Haibin, Smarandache, 
Zhang and Sunderraman (2010) proposed the concept of single 
valued neutrosophic set (SVNS), which can characterize the inde- 
terminacy of a perceptual information more explicitly. SVNS was 
then aggregated with TOPSIS by Ş ahin and Yi ̆gider (2014) to re- 
place the crisp information in the decision matrix. Their find- 
ings show that TOPSIS when integrated with SVNS performs bet- 
ter with incomplete, undetermined and inconsistent information 
in MCDA problems. As most of the membership functions in the 
research mentioned above are assumed to be triangular, to find 
another way to capture the vagueness of the qualitative infor- 
mation, Positive Trapezoidal Fuzzy Number (PTFN) was proposed 
by Bohlender, Kaufmann and Gupta (1986) and was introduced 
by Herrera and Herrera-Viedma (20 0 0) in group decision making 
problems. Chen, Lin and Huang (2006) adopted PTFN to present a 
fuzzy decision-making framework to deal with supplier selection 
problem. 






4 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
Table 1 
Framework of MADM. 


Step 1 Defining the decision problem Select optimal supplier with highest resilience over a group of alternative suppliers 
Step 2 Selecting and structuring attributes Identify the evaluation attributes with respect to supplier resilience 
Step 3 Measuring performance Gather data about the alternatives’ performance on the attributes and summarize this in a decision matrix 
Step 4 Scoring alternatives Evaluate the performance of the alternative suppliers based on the objective of the attributes 
Step 5 Weighting criteria and decision makers Determine the weight of attributes and decision makers based on their importance 
Step 6 Calculating aggregate scores Use the alternatives’ scores on the attributes and the weights for the attributes and decision makers to get 


“total value” by which the alternatives are ranked with TOPSIS 
Step 7 Dealing with uncertainty Perform Sensitivity analysis to understand the level of robustness of the MADM results 
Step 8 Reporting and examination of findings Interpret the MADM outputs, including sensitivity analysis, to support decision making 
However, in case of SVNS, when the decision makers’ evalu- 


ation are provided as a single number within the interval [0,1], 
it does not necessarily represent the underlying uncertainty as- 
sociated with that evaluation scheme. Thus, in such context it 
is preferred to represent the decision makers’ assessment by an 
interval rather than a single number, indicating to the signifi- 
cance of using Inter-valued Fuzzy Sets (IVFS). Guijun and Xiaop- 
ing (1998) defined the concept of IVFS, while Ashtiani, Haghigh- 
irad, Makui and ali Montazer (2009) extend the application of 
IVFS in TOPSIS to solve Multi Criteria Decision Making problems. 
Foroozesh, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam and Mousavi (2017) developed a 
multi-criteria group decision making model integrating IVFS and 
fuzzy possibilistic statistical concepts to weigh the decision mak- 
ers involved in decision making process. Finally, with the help 
of a relative-closeness coefficient based technique, they rank re- 
silient suppliers under the interval-valued fuzzy uncertainty. Ad- 
ditionally, Atanassov and Gargov (1989) proposed the notion of 
Interval-valued Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets (IVIFS) as a further gener- 
alization of fuzzy set theory. Lakshmana Gomathi Nayagam, Mu- 
ralikrishnan and Sivaraman (2011) adopted IVIFS in multi crite- 
ria decision making problem. The method was then extended by 
Chen, Wang and Lu (2011) and Chen (2015) to group decision mak- 
ing setting, while Mohammad (2012) implemented this approach 
in supplier selection problem. After reviewing the relevant liter- 
atures, we found that the state-of-the-art studies deal with only 
qualitative attributes, while we argue that many of the essential 
and significant evaluation attributes may entail quantitative DRI, 
especially for selecting resilient suppliers for logistics 4.0 compa- 
nies. 


It is true that the existing research have shown promising po- 
tential of MCDA methods and fuzzy techniques in supplier selec- 
tion problems ( Gan et al., 2019; Haldar et al., 2012, 2014; Hasan, 
Shohag, Azeem & Paul, 2015; Jiang, Faiz & Hassan, 2018 ). How- 
ever, there are limitations of the state-of-the-art literatures: (i) to 
the best of our knowledge, no existing research extends F-MADM 
framework in supplier evaluation problems leveraging large num- 
ber of information (time series and graphical information), (ii) no 
prior study investigated F-MADM approach for evaluating suppli- 
ers’ performance from resilience and logistics 4.0 perspective, si- 
multaneously, and (iii) it is not clear how fuzzy based TOPSIS can 
be extended to process inherent uncertainty in decision relevant 
information associated with both the quantitative and qualitative 
attributes. These gaps in the existing studies create an avenue for 
further research to extend F-MADM framework to help decision 
makers in logistics 4.0 industries to strategically select resilient 
suppliers considering qualitative and large number of quantitative 
information, which lies in the central focus of this study. 
3. Multi attribute decision making (MADM) and fuzzy logic 
3.1. MADM 


MADM provides a comprehensive decision analysis framework 
that could help the stakeholders balance the advantages and dis- 


advantages of the alternatives in a multi-dimensional optimization 
problem, in which alternatives and evaluation attributes are the es- 
sential variables. The general decision-analysis procedure of MADM 
and the corresponding steps are summarized in Table 1 according 
to Thokala et al., (2016) : 
3.2. Technique for order preference by similarity to an ideal solution 
(TOPSIS) 


TOPSIS is a decision-making technique wherein the alternatives 
are evaluated based on their numerical distance to the ideal solu- 
tion. The closer the distance of an alternative to the ideal solution 
and the farther to the negative ideal solution, the higher a grade 
it would obtain. Because in this study, we are adopting triangular 
possibility distribution or triangular fuzzy number (TFN) to express 
the performance of the alternatives, Euclidian Distance is used to 
measure the performance of the alternatives, and the function is 
described as below ( ̧S ahin & Yi ̆gider, 2014; Singh, 2016 ): 
s + 


i = 
√ 


n ∑ 
j=1 


{ (
a i j − a + j )2 + (b i j − b + j )2 + (c i j − c + j )2 } i = 1 , 2 , . . . , n 


(3.1) 


s −
i = 


√ 
n ∑ 


j=1 
{ (


a i j − a −j )2 + (b i j − b −j )2 + (c i j − c −j )2 } i = 1 , 2 , . . . , n 
(3.2) 


˜ ρi = s −i 
s + 


i + s −i , 0 ≤ ˜ ρi ≤ 1 (3.3) 
where s + 


i and s −i are the positive and negative ideal solution re- 
spectively, ˜ ρi is the closeness coefficient, a ij , b ij , c ij are the com- 
ponent of the TFN that express the performance of alternatives on 
criteria j. a + 


j , b + j , c + j are the corresponding components of the Posi- 
tive Ideal Solution (PIS) and a −


j , b −j , c −j are the corresponding com- 
ponents of Negative Ideal Solution (NIS). 
3.3. Properties of triangular fuzzy number (TFN) 


A triangular fuzzy number (TFN) shown in Fig. 1 is defined with 
three points as follows: 
˜ A = ( a, b, c ) 
where [a, c] is the support and µ ˜ A (b) = 1 is the core of the fuzzy 
number. This representation is interpreted in terms of membership 
functions as follows: 
µ ˜ A ( x ) = 


⎧ 
⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ 
⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ 


0 , f or x < a 
x −a 
b−a , f or a < x < b 
c−x 
c−b , f or b < x < c 


0 , f or c < x 
(3.4) 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 5 


Fig. 1. Triangular fuzzy number. 
The operation of the TFN could be summarized as fol- 


lows ( Mahapatra, Mahapatra & Roy, 2016 ): let A = ( a 1 , b 1 , c 1 ), 
B = ( a 2 , b 2 , c 2 ), r is a real number, then, 
1) Addition : A + B = ( a 1 + a 2 , b 1 + b 2 , c 1 + c 2 ) 
2) Subtraction : A − B = ( a 1 − c 2 , b 1 − b 2 , c 1 − a 2 ) 
3) Multiplication : A × B = ( a 1 × a 2 , b 1 × b 2 , c 1 × c 2 ) 


A × r = ( a 1 × r, b 1 × r, c 1 × r ) 
(3.5) 


The underlying reason for using TFN instead of other fuzzy 
techniques is primarily due to the probability-possibility consis- 
tency principle that induces TFN from time series data. Moreover, 
TFN also provides the basis for converting granular information 
that are extracted from graphically presented historical data. 
3.4. Membership function and reliability modification 


The definition of membership function was first introduced by 
Zadeh (1965) , where the membership functions were used to op- 
erate on the domain of all possible values. In fuzzy logic, member- 
ship degree represents the truth value of a certain proposition. 


Different from the concept of probability, truth value repre- 
sents membership in vaguely defined sets. For any set X, the mem- 
bership degree of an element x of X in fuzzy set A is denoted 
as µA ( x ), which quantifies the grade of membership of the element 
x to the fuzzy set A. To calculate the membership degree, the uni- 
verse of discourse concerning different attributes are fuzzified us- 
ing linguistic classes according to the granule definiteness axiom 
of multi-granularity ( Sharif Ullah, 20 05; Ullah, 20 05 ). Fig. 2 shows 
the fuzzification of universe of discourse or frame of discernment 
consisting [a, b]. 


For the frame of discernment shown in the Fig. 2 , the mem- 
bership functions for the 7 different classes (B, MB, …,VVG) are 
calculated as follows: 


m B = max (0 , a 3 −x a 3 −a )
m MB = max (0 , min ( x −a 1 a 3 −a 1 , a 5 −x a 5 −a 3 )


· · · · · ·


m V VG = max (0 , x −a 11 b−a 11 )
(3.6) 


where a i = a + b−a 2 ×7 , i = 1 , 2 , . . . , ( 2 × 7 − 1 ) , and 7 is the num- 
ber of class in this frame of discernment. The membership func- 
tions are assumed to be triangular and symmetric. The member- 
ship function for each class depends on the frame of discernment 
of the attribute. 


As the membership functions are assumed triangular and sym- 
metric for the fuzzified frame of discernment, the uncertainty and 
impreciseness of the functions need to be taken into considera- 
tion. Wen, Miaoyan and Chunhe (2017) proposed a reliability-based 
modification to deal with uncertainty of information and the reli- 
ability of information sources. The reliability of the membership 
functions is measured by the static reliability index and dynamic 
reliability index. Static reliability index is defined by the similarity 
among classes, while dynamic reliability index is measured by the 
risk distance between the test samples and the overlapping area 
among classes, respectively. The comprehensive reliability is com- 
puted by the product of the two index, and the reliability-based 
membership function are fused using Dempster’s combination rule 
( Dempster, 1967; Wen et al., 2017 ). The numerical examples pro- 
vided by Jiang et al. (2018) verified the effectiveness of the relia- 
bility modification approach in membership functions. 


The static reliability index is measured by the overlapped area 
between two adjacent classes. In Fig. 3 , the shaded area is the 
overlapped region between classes M and MG. 


The larger the overlapped area between classes M and MG, the 
more likely that an input data is wrongly recognized in a linguistic 
class. The similarity between classes M and MG sim M , MG in a cer- 
tain attribute and the corresponding static reliability index R s 


j for 
C j can be described according to Wen et al. (2017) : 
si m M,MG = ∫ 


d 
c min 


c≤x ≤d ( m M ( x ) , m MG ( x ) ) dx 
∫ m M ( x ) + m MG ( x ) − ∫ d c min 


c≤x ≤d ( m M ( x ) , m MG ( x ) ) dx 
(3.7) 


R s j = ∑ 
i<l ( 1 − si m il ) (3.8) 


where i and l are the adjacent classes in the same universe of dis- 
course in one attribute. 


The dynamic reliability index is measured with a set of test 
sample and calculated by the risk distance between the peak of 
overlap area and the test value. 


If P M , MG is the peak of the overlap area between classes M and 
MG in Fig. 4 , and T j is the test sample generated for C j , the distance 
d between T j and P M , MG represents the risk distance that related to 
the uncertainty of the test sample. The risk distance and dynamic 
reliability index for C j can be formulated as: 
d M,MG = 


∣∣T j − P M,MG ∣∣
D (3.9) 


R d j = e 
n ∑ 
2 d ( l−1 ) l (3.10) 


where D is the range of the universe of discourse of C j , which is 
(a − b) in Fig. 3 . 


Fig. 2. Fuzzified frame of discernment. 






6 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


Fig. 3. Illustration of static reliability index. 


Fig. 4. Illustration of dynamic reliability index. 
Then the comprehensive reliability index for C j can be defined 


as: 
R j = R s j × R d j (3.11) 


After the normalization we get, 
R ∗j = R j 


max (R j ) (3.12) 
Then, the reliability-modified membership degree can be calcu- 


lated as: 
m R ∗j 


jl = R ∗j × m l (3.13) 
where l is a linguistic class in a universe of discourse. 
4. Quantitative data analytics 
4.1. Processing time-series data 


Sharif Ullah and Shamsuzzaman (2013) proposed an approach 
that can represent the uncertainty under a large set of continu- 
ous time-series input parameters (temporal data) by point cloud 
and transfer it to a graphical fuzzy number based on probability- 
possibility transformation. The transformation process is general- 
ized as follows: 


Assume, we have a temporal data presented in time-series data 
as shown in Fig. 5 . 


t


x(
t)


0 75 150 225 300 375 450
400


420


440


460


480


Fig. 5. Original time-series data. 


If we set the x ( t ) as the x-coordinate and x ( t + 1) as the y- 
coordinate, this set of parameters could be represented as a point 
cloud as shown in Fig. 6 , providing a visual/computational repre- 
sentation of variability, modality, and ranges associated with the 
quantity. 


Assume, g ( x ) be the probability density functions (pdf) that rep- 
resent the underlying point-cloud of x ( t ), the cumulative pdf, F ( x ), 
can be defined as: 
F ( x ) = ∫ g ( x ) dx 


Let PrA ( x ) denote the following formulation: 
P rA ( x ) = dF ( x ) 


dx 
A possibility distribution given by the membership function 


µ( x ) can be defined as: 
µ( x ) = P rA ( x ) 


max ( P rA ( x ) | ∀ x ∈ X ) 
After the probability-possibility transformation, the point cloud 


is transferred to a triangular possibility distribution or TFN in a 
graphical format as shown in Fig. 7 . In what follows, the triangular 
fuzzy set can be expressed as: 
A = ( 425 , 442 , 452 ) 


x(t)


x(
t+


1)


400 420 440 460 480
400


420


440


460


480


Fig. 6. Transferred point-cloud. 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 7 


x


m
ul


(x
)


420 425 430 435 440 445 450 455
-0.2


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


Fig. 7. Graphical triangular fuzzy number. 
4.2. Processing graphical information 


In the logistics 4.0 system, the data are not always generated 
in the format of continuous time-series. Sometimes they are gen- 
erated discretely and stored in the data base for future access. 
These historically stored data can be expressed in pieces of graphs 
( Domingo Galindo, 2016 ) because when visualized, these pieces of 
graphs can potentially present a large amount of information in an 
easy-to-understand way. Then, the necessary DRI in terms of pieces 
of crisp granular information can be extracted from these graphi- 
cally presented data according to Ullah and Noor-E-Alam (2018) . 
Fig. 8 (a) shows the visualization of data collected for five suppliers 
concerning cost per unit of product and production capacity. Then, 
graphical data associated with a single supplier can be extracted 
from the combined graph and is presented in Fig. 8 (b). Once data 
for individual supplier is presented graphically, then the associ- 
ated DRI concerning cost per unit of product and production ca- 
pacity can be extracted in the form of crisp granular information 
or ranges as visualized in Fig. 8 (c) and (d), respectively. 
5. Proposed supplier evaluation and order allocation model 


In this Supplier Evaluation and Order Allocation Model, both 
the quantitative and qualitative information are characterized by 
triangular fuzzy number (TFN) to evaluate the performance of the 
alternatives in a unified platform, simultaneously. For the quanti- 
tative attributes, time-series and non-time series data are trans- 
ferred to fuzzy set through point cloud and graphic extraction 
approaches, respectively, while qualitative assessments, including 
performance and weight appraisal, are transferred directly based 
on the standard fuzzification process of the frame of discernment. 
With the fuzzy set for all attributes and weights, the weighted de- 
cision matrix is constructed. Then the algorithm of TOPSIS is per- 
formed to evaluate the performance of the alternatives and gener- 
ate the list of preference based on the obtained ranking score. Fi- 
nally, the ranking score are regarded as the coefficient in the MCGP 
to calculate the order allocation plan that best fulfill the require- 
ments of the decision makers. To provide a comprehensive and un- 
derstandable illustration for the proposed supplier evaluation and 
order allocation model, we present a complete computation pro- 
cess with detailed description below: 


Step 1: Processing quantitative data 
In this step, we process and transfer the large number of quan- 


titative data entailing time-series and non-time series data, which 
are available in pieces of graphics. Following two sub-steps consti- 
tute this step. 


Step 1(a): Transferring time-series based quantitative data to 
TFN 


At first, the time-series data, for supplier S i on attribute C j are 
expressed by a point cloud in the form of P ( x ( t ), x ( t + 1)) accord- 
ing to the principle explained in Section 4.1 . After the point cloud 
transformation, the data are transferred to a possibility distribution 
of triangular form as shown in Fig. 7 , which can be represented by 
a TFN in the form of A ij ( a ij , b ij , c ij ). 


Step 1(b): Transferring non-time series based graphical data 
to TFN 


After the information extracted from the graphical information 
in the form of crisp granular information, the randomly obtained r 
number of crisp granular information or ranges for supplier S i on 
attribute C j , R ijr ( p ijr , q ijr ), are presented in Table 2 . 


Table 2 
Example of extracted ranges. 


Ranges C j 
R ij 1 ( p ij 1 , q ij 1 ) 
R ij 2 ( p ij 2 , q ij 2 ) 
… …


R ijr ( p ijr , q ijr ) 
After collecting all the crisp granular information for every al- 


ternative supplier, we fuzzify the frame of discernment associated 
with every non-time series attribute C j based on the fuzzification 
approach proposed in Ullah and Noor-E-Alam (2018) . In the fuzzi- 
fication process, the span of the frame of discernment is generated 
by the minimum and maximum of all the extracted crisp granular 
information for a certain attribute regarding all the alternative sup- 
pliers, while the number of linguistic terms is determined accord- 
ing to the granule definiteness axiom ( Sharif Ullah, 2005; Ullah, 
2005 ). For Example, if p min = min 


r p i jr , q max = max r q i jr , the frame 
of discernment of C j presented as U = [ p min , q max ] can be fuzzified 
as shown in Fig. 9 . 


After the fuzzification process, the linguistic classes l and asso- 
ciated TFN table are constructed as in Table 3: 


Table 3 
Linguistic terms and associated TFN. 


Linguistic Terms TFN ( a , b , c ) 
B a B b B c B 
MB a MB b MB c MB 
… … … …


l m a l m b l m c l m 
where B and MB represent linguistic terms expressed as Bad, Mod- 
erately Bad, and l m is m th linguistic term that can assume the form 
such as Bad (B), Moderately Bad (MB), Moderately Good (MG), 
Good (G) etc. 


With the fuzzified frame of discernment, the membership de- 
gree for every range value R ijr ( p ijr , q ijr ) on each linguistic class is 
computed based on ( 3.6 ). 
m i j = 


∫ 
x ∈ R m F ( x ) dx 


R ′ (5.1) 
where R refers to the span of the criteria and R ′ refers to the 
largest segment of R that belongs to the support m F . This way, the 
membership degree of R ijr ( p ijr , q ijr ) on attribute C j at linguistic class 
l is calculated as M ijrl . 


Because all the membership functions are assumed to be sym- 
metric and triangular, we perform reliability modification for the 
calculated membership degrees. According to Eqs. (3.7 )–( 3.12 ), the 
comprehensive reliability indexes for C j could be generated as 
Rc j . Multiplied with the obtained Rc j based on ( 3.13 ), the original 






8 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


(a) Data visualization for all 
suppliers


(b) Extracting graph for a 
single supplier


(d) Crisp granular information 
concerning production capacity


(c) Crisp granular information 


Fig. 8. Graphical information extraction process. 


Fig. 9. Fuzzified frame of discernment. 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 9 
Table 4 
Example of original linguistic data. 


C j 
Supplier / DMs DM 1 DM 2 … DM k 
S 1 L 1 j 1 L 1 j 2 … L 1 jk 
S 2 L 2 j 1 L 2 j 2 … L 2 jk 
… … … … …


S i L ij 1 L ij 2 … L ijk 
membership degree M ijrl can be modified as M ′ i jrl . As there are r 
computed modified membership degrees for each linguistic class, 
we aggregate them as follows: 
M ∗i jrl = ∑ 


r M ′ i jl (5.2) 
Then, the reliability modified membership degrees are normal- 


ized to induce TFN for the integrated TOPSIS decision matrix as 
mentioned below: 
N i jl = M ∗i jl ∑ 


M ∗
i jl , 


∑ 
N i jl = 1 (5.3) 


To generate the TFN for the attribute involving non-time se- 
ries graphical information, we utilized the TFN for every linguis- 
tic class in Table 3 and the membership degrees calculated above. 
In this integration process, without loss of information generality, 
the membership degree is regarded as the weight of each linguis- 
tic class for every alternative concerning each attribute. Then the 
membership degree is converted to TFN that will be used in the 
TFN based TOPSIS decision matrix. The integrated TFN is presented 
as A ij ( a ij , b ij , c ij ): 
a i j = ∑ 


l a l N i jl 
b i j = ∑ 


l b l N i jl 
c i j = ∑ 


l c l N i jl 
(5.4) 


where l is the linguistic class in Table 3 . 
Step 2: Processing qualitative data 
Step 2 process and transfer qualitative data associated with 


supplier performance and importance weight of underlying at- 
tributes evaluation provided by multiple decision makers (DM). 
Following two sub-steps entails step 2. 


Step 2(a): Processing and transferring qualitative data entail- 
ing suppliers’ performance evaluation to aggregated TFN 


The qualitative assessments given by the decision makers for 
each supplier against each attribute are directly transferred to re- 
spective TFNs. For example, a set of qualitative assessments for i th 
suppliers on attribute C j given by k th DM can be represented as in 
Table 4 . The qualitative assessment given by L ijk can assume any 
of the form given by Bad (B), Moderately Bad (MB), Moderate (M), 
Moderately Good (MG), Good (G), Very Good (VG), Very Very Good 
(VVG), and Extremely Good (EG). 


These qualitative appraisals are then converted to respective 
TFNs using standard TFN ( Table 14 in Appendix A ) associated with 
different linguistic classes, similar to ( Chen et al., 2006 ). The con- 
verted TFN can be presented as in Table 5 . In doing so, the uncer- 
tainty associated with vague qualitative assessment is also quanti- 
fied with the help TFN. 


Finally, the TFN-based TOPSIS decision matrix is constructed 
by incorporating and aggregating the conflicting qualitative assess- 
ments provided by all the DMs involved in the decision-making 
process. This is similar to what is proposed by Chen et al. (2006) as 


Table 5 
Example of TFN decision matrix. 


C j 
Supplier / DMs DM 1 DM 2 … DM k 
S 1 ( a 1 j 1 , b 1 j 1 , c 1 j 1 ) ( a 1 j 2 , b 1 j 2 , c 1 j 2 ) … ( a 1 jk , b 1 jk , c 1 jk ) 
S 2 ( a 2 j 1 , b 2 j 1 , c 2 j 1 ) ( a 2 j 2 , b 2 j 2 , c 2 j 2 ) … ( a 2 jk , b 2 jk , c 2 jk ) 
… … … … …


S i ( a ij 1 , b ij 1 , c ij 1 ) ( a ij 2 , b ij 2 , c ij 2 ) … ( a ijk , b ijk , c ijk ) 
Table 6 
Linguistic terms and corresponding 
fuzzified TFN. 


Weight of criteria 
Linguistic Terms TFN (a, b, c) 
VUI (0,0.1,0.2) 
UI (0.1,0.2,0.3) 
… …


EI (0.8,0.9,1) 
follows: 
A i j (a i j , b i j , c i j ) = 


(
min 


k a i jk , 
∑ 


k b i jk 
k , max k c i jk 


)
(5.5) 


Step 2(b): Transferring qualitative data on attributes’ weight 
to TFN 


The weights of all the attributes are determined and expressed 
by the DMs in the form of qualitative assessment as well. Such 
qualitative assessment can be expressed in the form of linguistics 
terms e.g., Very Unimportant (VUI), Unimportant (UI), Moderately 
Important (MI), Important (I), Very Important (VI), and Extremely 
Important (EI). Some of these linguistic terms and associated TFNs 
are listed in Table 6 . Since the weight lies in between 0 and 1, the 
frame of discernment is represented as U = [0, 1]. Using these TFNs 
we fuzzified the frame of discernment of the attribute weights as 
shown in Fig. 10: 


Then the weight of each attribute is at first directly converted 
to a TFN, w j ( a j , b j , c j ) using the TFN associated with respective lin- 
guistic term. Once all the qualitative weights provided by multiple 
DMs are converted to respective TFNs, the aggregated weight and 
corresponding TFNs are generated according to Eq. (5.5) as men- 
tioned in step 2(a). 


Step 3: Performing TOPSIS to rank alternative suppliers 
Because in the weighted decision matrix, the TFNs concerning 


each supplier against each attribute have different support defined 
as [ a ij , c ij ],we first normalized each TFN A ij ( a ij , b ij , c ij ) on all at- 
tributes before performing TOPSIS based on the principle used in 
( Chen et al., 2006 ): 
A ′ i j (a ′ i j , b ′ i j , c ′ i j ) = 


( 
a i j 


max 
i c i j , 


b i j 
max 


i c i j , 
c i j 


max 
i c i j 


) 
, ∀ j ∈ G 1 


(5.6) 
A ′ i j (a ′ i j , b ′ i j , c ′ i j ) = 


( 
min 


i a i j 
c i j , 


min 
i a i j 
b i j , 


min 
i a i j 
a i j 


) 
, ∀ j ∈ G 2 (5.7) 


where G 1 is the set of beneficial attributes which will be maxi- 
mized and G 2 is the set of non- beneficial attributes which will be 
minimized. 


As now we have the normalized TFN A ′ 
i j ( a ′ i j , b ′ i j , c ′ i j ) for all sup- 


pliers S i on every attribute C j , and the attribute weight w j ( a j , b j , c j ), 
the normalized and weighted TFN based TOPSIS decision matrix 
{ A ∗


i j } is constructed based on ( 3.5 ): 
A ∗i j (a ∗i j , b ∗i j , c ∗i j ) = A ′ i j × w j (5.9) 






10 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


Weight


m
ul


(.)


0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
-0.2


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2
VUI UI   MUI  M    MI     I      VI    VVI  EI


Fig. 10. Fuzzification of criteria weight. 
The Positive Ideal Solution (PIS) and Negative Ideal Solution 


(NIS) are determined as ( Chen et al., 2006 ): 
A p j (a p j , b p j , c p j ) = max 


i c ∗i j 
A n j (a n j , b n j , c n j ) = min 


i a ∗i j (5.10) 
And, finally the closeness coefficient ( ̃  ρi ) for S i is generated as: 


d + 
i = 


√ 
∑ 


j (a ∗i j −a pj )2 + ∑ j (b ∗i j −b pj )2 + ∑ j (c ∗i j −c pj )2 
3 


d −
i = 


√ 
∑ 


j (a ∗i j −a n j )2 + ∑ j (b ∗i j −b n j )2 + ∑ j (c ∗i j −c n j )2 
3 


˜ ρi = d −i ( d −i + d + i ) 
(5.11) 


The higher the ˜ ρi , the higher will be the ranking for a particular 
supplier. Ranking is given as an ascending order starting from 1 for 
a supplier with highest ˜ ρi , and follows chronological order for rest 
of the suppliers. 


Step 4: Performing MCGP to determine optimal order alloca- 
tion policy 


It is perhaps not surprising that a single supplier may not 
always have the ability to supply the entire ordered quantity. 
In addition, strategic decision makers may opt for diversifying 
the sourcing channels while ensuring stability and competitive- 
ness among alternative suppliers under the threat of disruption 
risks. These altogether make it feasible that decision makers of- 
ten times have to depend on multiple suppliers, requiring an op- 
timal order allocation strategy that takes into account the sup- 
plier preferential ranking R i generated via F-MADM approach as 
input. Multi-choice Goal Programming (MCGP)—a viable approach 
in this regard—can successfully be integrated with F-MADM based 
DSS to devise an optimal order allocation plan ( Liao & Kao, 2011 ). 
MCGP has the potential to address multi-attribute decision making 
problems, wherein decision makers aim to minimize the penalty 
of a set of objectives assigned to all attributes. The essential idea 
of integrating F-MADM approach with MCGP is to enable such an 
optimal order allocation policy that can maximize the total value 
created from the intended procurement plan. The Total Value of 
Procurement (TVP) is quantitatively defined as the aspiration level 
that is set by the decision makers, and it can be sometimes con- 
servative based on the company’s resource limitations and incom- 
pleteness of available information. A well-judged and/or conserva- 
tive aspiration level e.g. TVP can avoid the potential negative ef- 
fect of the intended procurement plan. Often times, in MCGP set- 
ting, the decision makers are allowed to set a multi-choice aspi- 
ration level (MCAL) for each goal to help avoid unintended under- 
estimation and overestimation of decision making ( Chang, 2008 ). 


The MCAL for each target associated with multiple attributes is 
presented in certain interval values, allowing the decision makers 
to consider uncertainty/incompleteness of available decision rel- 
evant information. Therefore, once the closeness coefficients for 
each alternative suppliers are generated at the end of Step 3, these 
are used as the coefficient in the proposed MCGP according to 
Guneri, Yucel and Ayyildiz, (2009) so that the overall penalty for 
not satisfying the targets is minimized. 


Leveraging this principle, we formulated the MCGP as follows: 
Minimize ∑ 


i 
(
d + 


i + d −i ) + ∑ 
j 


(
e + 


j + e −j ), i = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , j = 1 , 2 , 3 
Subject to: 


n ∑ 
1 C n × x n − d + 1 + d −1 ≥ T (1) 
n ∑ 
1 U n × x n − d + 2 + d −2 = y 1 (2) 


y 1 − e + 1 + e −1 = I min (3) 
I min ≤ y 1 ≤ I max (4) 
( 


n ∑ 
1 L n × x n 


) 
/ n ∑ 


1 x n − d + 3 + d −3 = y 2 (5) 
y 2 − e + 2 + e −2 = R min (6) 
R min ≤ y 2 ≤ R max (7) 


n ∑ 
1 x n − d + 4 + d −4 ≤ Q (8) 


x n , d + i , d −i , e + j , e −j ≥ 0 (9) 
where: 


d + 
i , d −i , e + m , e −m stand for the penalties in violation of respective 


constraints 
x n is the optimal ordered quantity assigned to n th Supplier 
C n is the closeness coefficients ( ̃  ρi ) of the available suppliers 
T is the total value created from procurement (TVP) 
U n is the unit cost of quantity when purchased from n th sup- 


plier 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 11 
y 1 is the total available budget for the procurment 
I min , I max are the lower limit and upper limit on the budget, respec- 


tively 
L n is lead time of the n th supplier 
y 2 is the total allowable lead time for a particualr order 
R min , R max are the lower limit and upper limit on lead time, re- 


spectively 
Q is the procurement level set by the decision makers 
n is the number of alternative suppliers 
The objective function aims to minimize the total non- 


achievement penalties of multiple targets assigned in different 
constraints. Constraint (1) ensures that the orders should be allo- 
cated among multiple suppliers considering their preferential rank- 
ing in such a way so that a minimum TVP is achieved. In other 
words, constraint (1) sets an upper bound on TVP. Meanwhile, con- 
straint (2) refers to the goal of procurement budget, signifying that 
total procurement cost will not exceed the budget after includ- 
ing the positive and negative deviation of the intended goal. Con- 
straints (3) and (4) explain the aspiration levels of the goal as- 
sociated with procurement budget. In a similarly way, constraint 
(5) –(7) illustrate the lead time preference along with the aspira- 
tion levels associated with corresponding lead times. Finally, con- 
straint (8) with consideration of deviations from the procurement 
level goal, restrict that the total order allocated to multiple suppli- 
ers must equal the procurement level set by the decision makers. 


Such an MCGP model is anticipated to handle multiple objec- 
tives if a decision maker seeks the optimal solution from a set of 
feasible solutions considering the aspiration levels of the objec- 
tives; thus, enabling the management to optimally balance their 
requirements among alternative suppliers when the multiple re- 
quirements cannot be satisfied by a single supplier. 


The proposed decision-making framework is presented as a 
flow chart in Fig. 11: 
6. Case illustration 


To demonstrate the effectiveness and usefulness of the pro- 
posed supplier evaluation and order allocation DSS, we present a 
hypothetical case study that is generalizable to companies operat- 
ing under logistics 4.0. Such logistics 4.0 companies concern dif- 
ferent aspects of end-to-end logistics and supply chain manage- 
ment, which transforms the way those companies manage their 
logistics operations. This transformation is powered by the digital- 
ization of supply chain system—characterized by the speed, flex- 
ibility, real-time connectedness among different entities of logis- 
tics 4.0—arguably, supply chain 4.0. Crucially, effective sourcing of 
raw materials plays a significant role in achieving that desired level 
of efficiency, responsiveness and resilience in the context of con- 
nected, decentralized and digitalized supply chain. Often times, a 
set of alternative suppliers may serve the purpose of providing a 
particular raw material. Strategic decision makers responsible for 
taking such high-impact sourcing decisions must choose a supplier 
among available alternatives who can best serve the requirement 
of resilience, sustainability and efficiency. Therefore, the supplier 
evaluation and selection process in this context of logistics 4.0 is 
characterized as a decision-making problem comprising multiple 
conflicting attributes. The problem becomes even more complex 
when a single supplier is not able to provide entire ordered quan- 
tity, and allocation of order is needed among multiple suppliers. 
6.1. Evaluation attributes 


As alluded previously, we select and define several attributes 
based on which the alternative suppliers are evaluated from logis- 
tics 4.0 and resilience perspectives. Attributes are divided into two 


main groups: (1) quantitative and (2) qualitative as presented in 
Table 7 . For attributes in the quantitative subset, large number of 
data is available in the form of continuous time series. Data col- 
lected historically are characterized as non-time series data. These 
historically collected data are often stored graphically in logistics 
4.0 environment due to the digitalization, cloud storage facilities 
and Internet of Things (IOT). Moreover, when visualized graphi- 
cally, these data entail a great deal of actionable information that 
has been proven to be valuable while evaluating several sourcing 
options. As such, quantitative criteria are then sub-divided into two 
groups based on the type of data available as decision relevant in- 
formation. We characterized that for inventory and delivery sched- 
ules, data are collected continuously and presented in time series 
as real-time visibility and end-to-end data sharing are considered 
as crucial aspects of logistics 4.0. On the other hand, data asso- 
ciated with supplier’s production capacity and cost are collected 
over the time and can be presented graphically. In case of other fif- 
teen attributes listed in Table 7 , qualitative assessments are given 
by multiple decision makers for each alternative supplier. All those 
attributes are so chosen that has been used to measure the re- 
silience performance of the suppliers in the context of logistics 4.0. 


To further specify the effect of these attributes in enhancing re- 
silience i.e., reducing vulnerability against anticipated disruptions 
and improving recoverability after being affected by disruption, we 
categorize and associate them to pre-disaster and post-disaster re- 
silience activities. Attributes C 2 , C 5 , C 6 , C 7 , C 8 , C 9 , C 11, C 12 , C 13 , and 
C 15 are used to evaluate alternative suppliers based on their ability 
to reduce the vulnerability against potential disruptions, and thus 
refer to the pre-disaster resilience activities of the suppliers. On 
the other hand, attributes C 1 , C 3 , C 10 , C 14 , C 16 , C 17 , C 18 and C 19 
are used to evaluate suppliers depending on their ability to re- 
cover quickly and effectively after being affected by disruption, and 
thus represent supplier’s post disaster resilience strategies. Cost 
(attribute C 4 ) is considered as expense that supplier has to incur to 
provide the goods, and also to ensure the desired level of resilience 
through coordinated pre-disaster and post-disaster strategies. 
6.2. Results and sensitivity analysis 


To test the practicability of our proposed model, we randomly 
generated a set of data in Appendix A . The numerical example in- 
cludes five alternati ve suppliers that are evaluated with regards to 
four quantitative attributes and fifteen qualitative attributes pre- 
sented in Table 7 . For each supplier, 500 records are collected as 
continuous time series in case of pre-positioned inventory level 
(attribute C 1 ) and lead time variability (attribute C 2 ) (presented in 
Figs. 15 and 16 in Appendix A ). As mentioned in sub-step 1(a) in 
Section 5 , these time-series data are transferred to possibility dis- 
tribution of triangular form ( Figs. 18 and 19 in Appendix B ), which 
afterwards were used to induce TFNs ( Table 15 in Appendix B ). In 
case of production capacity and cost, 300 records are used from 
historically collected data, which are presented in several pieces of 
graphs, making it easier to process this large quantity of data into 
actionable decision relevant information ( Fig. 17 in Appendix A ). 
According to the sub-step 1(b) mentioned in Section 5 , the crisp 
granular information extracted from these graphs concerning each 
supplier are presented in Table 16 ( Appendix B ). Then the in- 
tegrated TFNs associated with each of these two attributes for 
all five alternati ve suppliers are computed following the proce- 
dure described in sub-step 1(b) in Section 5 and are presented 
in Table 17 ( Appendix B ). Performance evaluation data concerning 
each supplier against each qualitative attribute are collected from 
five decision makers who are assumed to have equal importance 
in decision making process. As previously mentioned in Section 5 , 
these qualitative assessments are provided in the form of linguis- 
tic appraisals, which are presented in Table 13 for attribute C 5 






12 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


Fig. 11. DSS for resilient supplier evaluation framework in logistics 4.0. 
to C 19 ( Appendix A ). These qualitative assessments are transferred 
to corresponding TFNs according to the process detailed in sub- 
step 2(a) in Section 5 . Similarly, the qualitative weights of all the 
attributes provided by multiple DMs in linguistic terms are also 
listed in Table 13 ( Appendix A ), which later are converted to re- 
spective TFNs according to the principle described in sub-step 2(b) 
in Section 5 and presented in Table 18 ( Appendix B ). After convert- 
ing all the quantitative and qualitative DRI into respective TFNs, 


the weighted TFN-based TOPSIS decision matrix is constructed, 
which was used to determine the PIS and NIS according to step 3 
in Section 5 . The PIS and NIS associated with all the attributes are 
listed in Table 19 ( Appendix B ). Finally, the closeness coefficients 
( ̃  ρi ) are calculated for each alternative supplier. 


The closeness coefficient ( ̃  ρi ) and preferential ranking scores of 
the alternative suppliers generated by the proposed model are pre- 
sented in the Table 8 and Fig. 12 . As presented in Fig. 12 , supplier 






M
.M


. H
a


sa
n


, D
. Jia


n
g a


n
d A


.M
.M


.S
. U


lla
h et a


l. / E
x
p


e
rt S


y
ste


m
s W


ith A
p


p
lica


tio
n


s 1
3


9 (2
0


2
0


) 11
2


7
9


9 
1


3 


Table 7 
List of attributes considered in decision making process. 


Types of decision relevant 
information C j Attributes Objective Description 


Quantitative 
attributes Time-series data C 1 Pre-positioned inventory level Max The quantity of inventory in stock and available for supply. C 2 Lead time variability Min Time that supplier take to deliver the order to the company. 


Non-time-series data 
presented graphically C 3 Production capacity Max Quantity of the products that a supplier is capable to produce per day. C 4 Cost Min Cost that is incurred by the company while purchasing the required quantity from a 


particular supplier. The cost here included per unit production and transportation cost. 
Qualitative 
attributes Qualitative assessment presented in linguistic terms C 5 Digitalization Max Enabled by Web technologies, work flow tools, portals for customers, suppliers and employees, and information technology innovations targeted at supply chains and customer 


relationships ( Rai, Patnayakuni & Seth, 2006 ). 
C 6 Traceability Max The ability to trace the origin of materials and parts, processing history and distribution or 


location of the product while being delivered ( Aung & Chang, 2014 ). 
C 7 Supply chain density Min The quantity and geographical spacing of nodes within a supply chain. 
C 8 Supply chain complexity Max The number of nodes in a supply chain and the interconnections between those nodes. 
C 9 Re-engineering Max The corrective procedure for the incorporation of any engineering design change within the 


product. Suppliers need to possess re-engineering capability to respond to customer’s 
change of taste or requirements. 


C 10 Supplier’s resource flexibility Max The different logistics strategies which can be adopted either to release a product to a 
market or to procure a component from a supplier. 


C 11 Automation disruption Min Ability to withstand the disruption caused in the automated manufacturing system. 
C 12 Information management Max The ability to acquire, store, retrieve, process and share fast flowing information regarding 


demand and lead time volatility, change in price, real time location sharing while delivering 
the raw materials. 


C 13 Cyber security risk management Max Ability to prevent or mitigate damage from IT security breaches in supply chains, where 
breaches can disrupt production, cause loss of essential data, and compromise confidential 
information. 


C 14 Supplier reliability Max The availability during disruptions of alternative transportation channels with different 
characteristics based on their costs and delivery dates. 


C 15 Supply chain visibility Max The ability of the supplier to have a vivid view of upstream and downstream inventories, 
demand and supply conditions, and production and purchasing schedules. 


C 16 Level of collaboration Max Supplier collaboration reduces forecasting and inventory management risks, thereby 
enhancing resilience of supply chains. Also, it helps mitigate supply side uncertainty after 
disruption hits. 


C 17 Restorative capacity Max The ability of suppliers to repair and quickly restore to its normal operating conditions after 
a disruptive event. 


C 18 Rerouting Max Capability of changing the usual mode of transport while anticipating or being affected by 
the disruptions. Companies can combine multiple modes of intermodal transportation which 
are fast to ensure uninterrupted supply of goods and operations of supply chain. 


C 19 Agility Max The speed with which a firm’s internal supply chain functions can adapt to marketplace 
changes resulting from disruption and thus can better respond to unforeseen events 






14 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
Table 8 
Ranking score of the suppliers. 


Supplier d + d − ˜ ρi R i 
S 1 1.80 1.39 0.436 3 
S 2 1.82 1.44 0.441 2 
S 3 1.76 1.48 0.456 1 
S 4 1.88 1.33 0.414 4 
S 5 1.95 1.23 0.388 5 


0
1
2
3
4
5
6


R
an


ki
ng


 S
co


re


Suppliers


Suppliers' ranking score


Fig. 12. Supplier’s ranking score. 
3 has the highest ˜ ρi value, whereas lowest ˜ ρi value is observed for 
supplier 5. The highest ˜ ρi value indicates highest preferential rank- 
ing for that particular supplier, and corresponds to lowest number 
in the R i . The lowest number in R i stands for highest preferred sup- 
plier. 


Once the ˜ ρi values are obtained for each supplier, the MCGP is 
performed and solved with Lingo software. We assume that based 
on the previous experience, available resources and information, 
the decision makers have set different aspiration levels associated 
with different goals, which are presented below: 


(1) The total value created from procurement, defined as T at 
least 260, and the more the better. It is signified as TVP con- 
straint. 


(2) The total cost of procurement is set in between $30 0,0 0 0 to 
$350,0 0 0, and the less the better. This correspond to budget 
constraint. 


(3) The lead time alternatively termed as delivery time is set 
in between 10 and 12 days, and the less the better. These 
parameters are used for delivery constraint. 


(4) Total procurement level should not be higher than 500, leads 
to order quantity constraint. 


With the abovementioned multiple goals, the MCGP is formu- 
lated as follows: 
Minimize ∑ 


i 
(
d + 


i + d −i ) + ∑ 
j 


(
e + 


j + e −j ), i = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , j = 1 , 2 , 3 
Subject to: 


0 . 467 x 1 + 0 . 45 x 2 + 0 . 448 x 3 + 0 . 451 x 4 + 0 . 388 x 5 − d + 1 + d −1 
≥ 260 ( 1 ) ; T V P constraint 


700 x 1 + 10 0 0 x 2 + 60 0 x 3 + 50 0 x 4 + 650 x 5 − d + 2 + d −2 
= y 1 ( 2 ) ; Budget constraint 


y 1 − e + 1 + e −1 = 30 0 0 0 0 ( 3 ) ; Budget aspiration le v el 


Table 9 
Optimal order allocation plan. 


Supplier Allocated order quantity 
S 1 29 
S 2 0 
S 3 442 
S 4 29 
S 5 0 


250 0 0 0 ≤ y 1 ≤ 350 0 0 0 ( 4 ) ; Budget aspiration le v el 
(11 . 01 x 1 + 9 x 2 + 14 . 03 x 3 + 14 . 01 x 4 + 14 x 5 ) / n ∑ 


1 x n − d + 3 + d −3 
= y 2 ( 5 ) ; Deli v ery time constraint 


y 2 − e + 2 + e −2 = 10 ( 6 ) ; Deli v ery time aspiration le v el 
10 ≤ y 2 ≤ 12 ( 7 ) ; Deli v ery time aspiration le v el 


n ∑ 
1 x n − d + 4 + d −4 ≤ 500 ( 8 ) ; Order quant it y const raint 


x n , d + i , d −i , e + j , e −j ≥ 0 ( 9 ) 
After solving the formulated MCGP model, the results generated 


from Lingo are presented in Table 9: 
Thus, in the final order allocation plan, the order quantity as- 


signed to S 1 , S 3 and S 4 are 29, 442 and 29 respectively with the 
total order quantity of 500, while other suppliers are not assigned 
with any order quantity. Additionally, it is perhaps not surprising 
that based on the company’s available resources and information 
concerning the alternative suppliers, management may set differ- 
ent aspiration level for TVP goal ranging from most pessimistic to 
most optimistic estimation. Thus, the DSS system should be able to 
propose alternative order allocation plan subject to the change of 
aspiration level associated with TVP goal. Therefore, we investigate 
several other instances by changing the aspiration level of TVP and 
assessed the effect of different TVP value on the order allocation 
plan as presented in Fig. 13 . 


For a more pessimistic estimation of TVP within 160 to 180, the 
model assigns order to supplier 1 and supplier 2, with higher pref- 
erence given to the first supplier. The allocated order quantity to 
supplier 1 increases up until a TVP value of 190, beyond which it 
starts to decrease and gets stable at a TVP value of 230. Orders are 
allocated to supplier 4 at a TVP value of 190, increases up until 
a TVP of 210, and similar to supplier 1 gets stable at TVP of 230. 
At a higher TVP value e.g., 220, majority of the order is allocated 
to highest ranked supplier 3 with equal quantity of order allocated 
to supplier 1 and supplier 4. After TVP value of 230, a stable or- 
der allocation plan is achieved entailing supplier 3, supplier 1 and 
supplier 4 with highest priority given to supplier 3. 


The preferential ranking score generated from F-MADM ap- 
proach considers refined weights provided by the decision makers 
on attributes involved in alternative supplier selection process. This 
is essential as not all attributes are equally important in supplier 
evaluation scheme, and thus for making rational decisions, the dif- 
ferential weights are incorporated in our proposed F-MADM based 
DSS. However, often times cost factor associated with a procure- 
ment plan—and largely with a supplier, can turn out to be a vital 
attribute, requiring greater importance on cost over all other deci- 
sion attributes. It is especially true for a logistics 4.0 company that 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 15 


0


50


100


150


200


250


300


350


400


450


500


160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260


A
llo


ca
te


d 
qu


an
tit


y


TVP value


Alternative order allocation plan for differnet TVP value 


Supplier 1
Supplier 2
Supplier 3
Supplier 4
Supplier 5


Fig. 13. Alternative order allocation plan for different TVP value. 


0.16


0.17


0.18


0.19


0.20


0.21


0.22


0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9


SC
RI


α


Analyzing cost (effeciecny) versus resiliency trade-off


Supplier 1


Supplier 2


Supplier 3


Supplier 4


Supplier 5


Fig. 14. Sensitivity analysis by assessing resiliency versus efficiency trade-off. 
mostly prefers efficiency from a supplier. On the contrary, prioritiz- 
ing resilience performance of a supplier over cost may often be the 
dominating preference for type of logistics 4.0 company valuing 
greater ability against disruption, and thus enhancing visibility and 
responsiveness in satisfying customer needs even at the expense 
of greater cost. Reflecting on these two extremely opposite needs 
of the management, we investigate how to assist strategic decision 
makers in analyzing this trade-off while evaluating alternative sup- 
pliers for sourcing options. In what follows, we categorize the at- 
tributes mentioned in Section 6.1 into two segments—considering 
cost alone as measure of efficiency while the rest of the attributes 
as-a-whole are considered as a holistic measure of resiliency for 
a supplier. We then perform TOPSIS separately on these two sets 
of attributes. Precisely saying, the ˜ ρi generated in the context of 
resiliency will not include the suppliers’ information on cost at- 
tribute, which means in 5.11, j ̸ = C 4 ∀ ˜ ρiR and j = C 4 ∀ ˜ ρiC ; ˜ ρiR 
and ˜ ρiC refer to the closeness coefficient associated with the re- 
siliency and efficiency measure, respectively for i th supplier. 


It is anticipated that supplier’s preferential ranking will change 
based on the differential im portance on efficiency and resilience 
measures. To categorically distinguish this from the originally gen- 


erated ranking score by F-MADM, we use Supplier’s Cost versus 
Resilience Index (SCRI) as a trade-off measure between resilience 
and efficiency, which is defined as follows: 
SCR I i = α ˜ ρiR + ( 1 − α) ̃  ρiC (6.1) 
where SCRI i is the index of i th supplier, and α refers to the im- 
portance in the range of [0, 1] given by the decision makers on 
resiliency performance. The lowest α value is explained as deci- 
sion maker’s lowest importance on resilience measure and vice- 
versa for cost (efficiency) measure. The corresponding ˜ ρi values 
(also normalized) as measured by TOPSIS for resilience attributes 
and cost attributes are presented in Tables 10 and 11 , respectively. 


Using normalized ˜ ρiR , ˜ ρiC and α values, we then investigate the 
change of SCRI for different suppliers as presented in Fig. 14 . Sup- 
plier 4 has the highest SCRI value till α = 0.4, pointing to the fact 
that when seeking resilience is less important compared to effi- 
ciency (signified by lower α values), supplier 4 is highly preferred 
being the most efficient or cost-effective supplier. Within a range 
of α in between 0.4 to 0.61, supplier 1 has the highest SCRI value. 
It suggests that when the importance of being efficient and re- 
silient is almost equal or does not differ that much, supplier 1 






16 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
Table 10 
Closeness coefficient ( ̃  ρi ) for resilience attributes. 


˜ ρiR 
Supplier d + d- ˜ ρi Normalized 
S 1 1.78 1.38 0.436 0.2043 
S 2 1.80 1.43 0.442 0.2064 
S 3 1.74 1.46 0.457 0.2137 
S 4 1.86 1.30 0.413 0.1939 
S 5 1.93 1.21 0.387 0.1817 


Table 11 
Closeness coefficient ( ̃ ρi ) for cost (efficiency) attribute. 


˜ ρiC 
Supplier d + d- ˜ ρi Normalized 
S 1 0.45 0.43 0.49 0.2073 
S 2 0.50 0.36 0.42 0.1762 
S 3 0.48 0.39 0.45 0.1913 
S 4 0.44 0.45 0.51 0.2143 
S 5 0.45 0.44 0.50 0.2110 


should be preferred. After a value of α = 0.61, supplier 3 has shown 
highest SCRI, indicating that when higher preference is given on 
resiliency, supplier 3 dominates all other alternative suppliers. Al- 
though supplier 5 has relatively higher SCRI value when higher im- 
portance is given on efficiency measure, its SCRI value decreases 
with higher importance given on resilience measure. On the other 
hand, for supplier 2 and supplier 3, the SCRI values increase with 
higher importance given on resilience measure. For several combi- 
nations of resilience versus efficiency trade-off, the generated SCRI 
values are presented in the Table 12 in Appendix A . Thus, our pro- 
posed DSS has demonstrated the managerial implication in terms 
of assisting the strategic decision makers to analyze the resiliency 
versus efficiency trade-off while evaluating and selecting alterna- 
tive suppliers along with the corresponding order allocation plan. 
7. Conclusion 


Selection of resilient suppliers in the context of logistics 4.0 re- 
quires processing heterogeneous information originated from mul- 
tiple qualitative and quantitative attributes that are conflicting in 
nature. Additionally, most of the qualitative attributes considered 
to measure the performance of resilient suppliers in logistics 4.0 
are substantially different than those used in traditional supplier 
selection problem––a combined fact that limits the applicability of 
traditional Fuzzy-Based Supplier selection framework in the pres- 
ence of heterogeneous DRI. To address these issues, this paper 
presents a DSS that considers the inherent uncertainty of impre- 
cise DRI to rank a set of alternative suppliers from resilient and lo- 
gistics 4.0 point of view. Particularly, we adapted and extended the 
TFN based TOPSIS to the framework of logistics 4.0 that can handle 
qualitative information and large number of quantitative informa- 
tion presented in the time-series as well as graphical format. Us- 
ing static and dynamic reliability index, we modified the member- 


ship value to further take into account the uncertainty and impre- 
ciseness of triangular membership function. Because one supplier 
may sometimes fail to provide the entire ordered quantity, we de- 
velop a model leveraging MCGP to allocate order among alternative 
supplies. This model takes input from the supplier ranking scores 
generated by proposed F-MADM approach. We also investigate the 
sensitivity of supplier’s resiliency versus efficiency measures with 
the change in importance of resiliency attributes (from resilience 
and logistics 4.0 perspective) and cost attribute. That way, we em- 
power the decision makers to generate alternative index based on 
the differential im portance on resiliency and cost attributes. We 
believe, the developed DSS will provide an effective and pragmatic 
approach to help stakeholders devise better sourcing decisions for 
logistics 4.0 industries. Future research can explore how to incor- 
porate interdependencies among several attributes that often times 
possess hierarchically structured relationship to some extent. Fur- 
ther research can also be carried out to explore other techniques 
such as PROMETHEE along with other fuzzy sets such as Interval 
Valued Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets (IVFS) to rank alternative suppliers 
supported by a mechanism for optimizing weights of the associ- 
ated decision makers. In addition to that, future studies can con- 
sider new attributes in MADM framework or adding constraint in 
the MCGP model to adapt with any policy changes within the com- 
pany due to the disruptions. 
Credit authorship contribution statement 


Md Mahmudul Hasan: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, In- 
vestigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing - orig- 
inal draft, Writing - review & editing. Dizuo Jiang: Conceptual- 
ization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Investigation, 
Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft. A.M.M. Sharif 
Ullah: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, 
Visualization. Md. Noor-E-Alam: Conceptualization, Methodology, 
Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing - review & 
editing. 
Funding 


This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
Declaration of interests 


The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- 
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper. 
Appendix A 


Time-series data 
Historically collected data presented in Fig. 17 in graphical format 
SCRI values created for different α values and normalized ˜ ρi ac- 


cording to Eq. (6.1) are presented in Table 12 . 
Linguistic data: 


Table 12 
SCRI based on α. 


Supplier / α 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
S 1 0.207 0.207 0.206 0.206 0.206 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.204 
S 2 0.179 0.182 0.185 0.189 0.192 0.195 0.198 0.201 0.204 
S 3 0.194 0.196 0.198 0.200 0.203 0.205 0.207 0.209 0.212 
S 4 0.212 0.210 0.208 0.206 0.204 0.202 0.200 0.198 0.195 
S 5 0.208 0.205 0.202 0.199 0.196 0.193 0.190 0.187 0.184 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 17 


445


450


455


460


465


470


475


480


485


490


495


0 50 100 150 200


In
ve


nt
or


y 
Le


ve
l


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 2 on inventory level


420


430


440


450


460


470


480


490


0 50 100 150 200


In
ve


nt
or


y 
Le


ve
l


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 3 on inventory level


420


425


430


435


440


445


450


455


460


465


0 50 100 150 200


In
ve


nt
or


y 
Le


ve
l


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 1 on inventory level


390


400


410


420


430


440


450


460


0 50 100 150 200


In
ve


nt
or


y 
Le


ve
l


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 4 on inventory level


420


425


430


435


440


445


450


455


460


0 50 100 150 200


In
ve


nt
or


y 
Le


ve
l


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 5 on inventory level


Fig. 15. Time-series data for suppliers on pre-positioned inventory level ( C 1 ). 






18 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


0 50 100 150 200


Le
ad


 T
im


e 
(D


ay
)


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 4 on lead time 
variability


8


10


12


14


16


18


20


0 50 100 150 200


Le
ad


 T
im


e 
(D


ay
)


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 3 on lead time 
variability


4
5
6
7
8
9


10
11
12
13
14


0 50 100 150 200


Le
ad


 T
im


e 
(D


ay
)


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 2 on lead time 
variability


7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


0 50 100 150 200


Le
ad


 T
im


e 
(D


ay
)


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 1 on lead time 
variability 


5


7


9


11


13


15


17


19


21


0 50 100 150 200


Le
ad


 T
im


e 
(D


ay
)


Time Series


Time-seires data for supplier 5 on lead time 
variability


Fig. 16. Time-series data for suppliers on lead time variability ( C 2 ). 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 19 


Fig. 17. Graphical information for suppliers on non-time-series attributes. 






20 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


Table 13 
Linguistic data (performance measurement and attribute weight). 


C 5 (Digitalization) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG VG VVG VG G 
S 2 VG VVG EG VG VG 
S 3 EG VG VVG VG EG 
S 4 VG VG G MG VVG 
S 5 M MG MG MG MB 
C 6 (Traceability) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG VG VVG VG VVG 
S 2 VG VG G MG MG 
S 3 EG VVG VVG EG VG 
S 4 MG M M MG G 
C 7 (Supply chain density) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG VG G MG VVG 
S 2 M MG MG MG MG 
S 3 G VG VVG VG G 
S 4 VG VVG VVG EG EG 
S 5 VG VVG VG VG VVG 
C 8 (Supply chain complexity) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 G G VG VG G 
S 2 VVG VG VG VVG VG 
S 3 M G MG MG G 
S 4 VG VVG VVG VVG VG 
S 5 M MG MG MG M 
C 9 (Re-engineering) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 M MG M M MG 
S 2 M MB MB MB B 
S 3 G VG G G G 
S 4 M MG M M M 
S 5 M M MG MG MB 
C 10 (Supplier’s resource flexibility) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG VVG VVG VG VG 
S 2 M MG G M MG 
S 3 VG VVG VVG VG VG 
S 4 VG VVG VVG VG EG 
S 5 G G M MG G 
C 11 (Automation disruption) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 G G VVG G VG 
S 2 VG G VVG VG VG 
S 3 M B M M B 
S 4 MG MG M G G 
S 5 EG VVG VVG VG VVG 
C 12 (Information management) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 MG MG M G G 
S 2 MG G G MG MG 
S 3 VG G VG VG G 
S 4 VG VG VVG VVG VG 
S 5 MG MG G M M 
C 13 (Cyber security risk management) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 MG MG G M MG 
S 2 G VG VG G G 
S 3 VG VG VVG VVG VG 
S 4 MG MG MG M MG 
S 5 VG G G MG MG 


( continued on next page ) 


Table 13 ( continued ) 
C 14 (Supplier reliability) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 EG VG VVG VVG EG 
S 2 MG MG G MG MG 
S 3 VG MG G G VG 
S 4 M M G G MG 
S 5 G VG G G VG 
C 15 (Supply chain visibility) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG VG G G G 
S 2 VG G VVG VG VG 
S 3 G G G VG G 
S 4 MG M M MG MG 
S 5 MG M M MB M 
C 16 (Level of collaboration) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 G G VG G G 
S 2 VG VVG EG VVG EG 
S 3 G G VG G G 
S 4 VG VG G G MG 
S 5 VVG VVG VG VG VVG 
C 17 (Restorative capacity) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 M G G MG MG 
S 2 G VG VG G VG 
S 3 EG VG VVG VG VVG 
S 4 M M MG MG M 
S 5 VVG G VG G G 
C 18 (Rerouting) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 G VG G G VG 
S 2 VG VVG VG EG VVG 
S 3 G MG G M MG 
S 4 VG G VG VG G 
S 5 G G MG G MG 
C 19 (Agility) 
Supplier DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
S 1 VG G G MG G 
S 2 M MG G G MG 
S 3 G MG G MG MG 
S 4 VG G VG G G 
S 5 G VG VG G VG 
Weight of the attribute 
Attribute DM 1 DM 2 DM 3 DM 4 DM 5 
C 1 I VI EI I VI 
C 2 M I VI I M 
C 3 M M I M I 
C 4 I I VI I I 
C 5 I I VI VI I 
C 6 EI I EI EI I 
C 7 M M I I M 
C 8 I VI I I VI 
C 9 M UI M M UI 
C 10 I VI VI VI I 
C 11 I I VI VI I 
C 12 I MI MI I MI 
C 13 M MI I MI I 
C 14 VI I I VI VI 
C 15 MI I M MI M 
C 16 I VI VI MI I 
C 17 I M M VI I 
C 18 I I MI M MI 
C 19 M MI I MI MI 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 21 
Table 14 
Linguistic terms (used in performance measurement) and coresponding TFNs. 


Performance Measurement 
Linguistic terms TFN (a, b, c) 
VB (0,1,2) 
B (1,2,3) 
… …


EG (8,9,10) 
Appendix B 


Attributes concerning time series data 
Based on the approach described in sub-step 1(a) and the orig- 


inal time-series data in Figs. 15 and 16 , the possibility distribution 
in the form of triangular fuzzy number are generated and pre- 
sented in Figs. 18 and 19 . 


With the obtained graphical TFN, the numerical TFN could be 
constructed from Figs. 18 and 19 as: 


Non-time-series attributes: 


Based on the computation process summarized in sub-step 1(b) 
and non-time series data in Fig. 17 , the original data are extracted 
in the form of range value and are presented in Table 16 . 


With the extracted range values and the fuzzified frame of 
discernment presented in Fig. 9 , the TFN decision matrix is con- 
structed as in Table 17: 


According to sub-step 2(b) and Table 13 , the attribute weight 
decision matrix is constructed and presented in Table 18 . 


The PIS and NIS matrix are generated based on function ( 5.6 ) 
and ( 5.7 ) in step 3 and are presented in Table 19 . 


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


440 450 460 470 480


Supplier 3


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


420 430 440 450 460


Supplier 1


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


450 460 470 480 490


Supplier 2


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


400 420 440 460


Supplier 4


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


420 430 440 450 460


Supplier 5 


Fig. 18. Graphical triangular fuzzy number for suppliers on pre-positioned inventory level ( C 1 ). 
Table 15 
Numerical triangular fuzzy number for suppliers on C 1 and C 2 . 


Supplier C 1 (Pre-positioned inventory level) C 2 (Lead time variability) 
a b c a b c 


S 1 423.98 441.04 454 7.98 11.01 15 
S 2 459.98 469.54 480 5.98 9 12 
S 3 441.98 455.01 470 10.98 14.03 17 
S 4 404.98 425.51 445 11.98 14.01 16 
S 5 424.98 446.05 459 9.98 14 18 






22 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


0 5 10 15 20


Supplier 1


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


0 5 10 15


Supplier 2


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


0 5 10 15 20


Supplier 3


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


0 5 10 15 20


Supplier 4


0


0.2


0.4


0.6


0.8


1


1.2


0 5 10 15 20


Supplier 5


Fig. 19. Graphical triangular fuzzy number for suppliers on lead time variability ( C 2 ). 
Table 16 
Extracted range values for suppliers on non-time-series attributes. 


S i S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 S 5 
C i C 1 C 2 C 1 C 2 C 1 C 2 C 1 C 2 C 1 C 2 
R i Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max 
R 1 103 134 337 472 60 88 405 554 76 103 371 529 131 147 272 467 115 143 348 463 
R 2 96 136 310 478 60 90 400 555 76 110 361 531 128 152 345 455 112 144 314 474 
R 3 96 134 296 483 58 90 394 556 78 113 355 528 125 157 394 446 112 145 294 483 
R 4 96 135 295 483 59 89 391 556 79 113 351 528 128 158 270 458 111 144 283 489 
R 5 98 136 297 481 59 91 391 554 78 115 351 524 129 156 273 450 112 145 279 484 
R 6 100 136 300 478 60 91 391 554 77 115 354 522 129 157 283 442 111 146 282 478 
R 7 101 135 385 459 58 89 408 551 75 115 354 518 130 158 317 436 111 147 306 465 
R 8 103 135 300 473 58 88 420 547 75 113 357 511 131 157 326 462 111 148 311 382 
R 9 105 135 325 475 58 88 426 544 75 114 367 505 131 158 270 463 113 148 301 480 
R 10 110 136 301 482 60 87 430 536 75 113 363 529 134 156 270 454 114 149 287 486 


Table 17 
Integrated triangular fuzzy number for suppliers on non-time-series attributes. 


Supplier C 3 C 4 
a b c a b c 


S 1 102.98 117.23 131.49 320.06 394.96 488.16 
S 2 66.14 75.55 92.23 358.10 470.87 526.03 
S 3 81.25 95.04 109.53 338.87 432.49 506.88 
S 4 124.33 141.10 150.33 311.70 379.58 481.14 
S 5 113.44 128.67 140.98 316.41 385.76 482.62 






M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 23 
Table 18 
Attribute weight decision matrix. 


Attribute Weight 
a b c 


C 1 0.5 0.7 1 
C 2 0.3 0.54 0.8 
C 3 0.3 0.48 0.7 
C 4 0.5 0.62 0.8 
C 5 0.5 0.64 0.8 
C 6 0.5 0.78 1 
C 7 0.3 0.48 0.7 
C 8 0.5 0.64 0.8 
C 9 0.1 0.32 0.5 
C 10 0.5 0.66 0.8 
C 11 0.5 0.64 0.8 
C 12 0.4 0.54 0.7 
C 14 0.5 0.66 0.8 
C 15 0.3 0.48 0.7 
C 16 0.4 0.62 0.8 
C 17 0.3 0.54 0.8 
C 18 0.3 0.52 0.7 
C 19 0.3 0.5 0.7 


Table 19 
PIS and NIS for attributes. 


Attribute PIS NIS 
TFN a b c a b c 
C 1 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.42 0.42 0.42 
C 2 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.10 0.10 0.10 
C 3 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.06 0.06 0.06 
C 4 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.15 0.15 0.15 
C 5 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.22 0.22 0.22 
C 6 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.30 0.30 0.30 
C 7 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.09 0.09 0.09 
C 8 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.17 0.17 0.17 
C 9 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.01 0.01 0.01 
C 10 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.15 0.15 0.15 
C 11 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.05 0.05 0.05 
C 12 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.13 0.13 0.13 
C 13 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.10 0.10 0.10 
C 14 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.15 0.15 0.15 
C 15 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.07 0.07 0.07 
C 16 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.16 0.16 0.16 
C 17 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.09 0.09 0.09 
C 18 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.09 0.09 0.09 
C 19 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.11 0.11 0.11 


References 
Abe, M., & Ye, L. (2012). The impacts of natural disasters on global supply chains 


(No. 11512). Asia-Pacific Research and Training Network on Trade (ARTNeT), an 
initiative of UNESCAP and IDRC, Canada. 


Ashtiani, B. , Haghighirad, F. , Makui, A. , & ali Montazer, G. (2009). Extension of fuzzy 
TOPSIS method based on interval-valued fuzzy sets. Applied Soft Computing, 9 (2), 
457–461 . 


Atanassov, K., & Gargov, G. (1989). Interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems, 31 (3), 343–349. doi: 10.1016/0165-0114(89)90205-4 . 


Atanassov, K. T. (1999). Intuitionistic fuzzy sets. In Intuitionistic fuzzy sets 
(pp. 1–137). Springer . 


Aung, M. M., & Chang, Y. S (2014). Traceability in a food supply chain: Safety and 
quality perspectives, Food Control. 39, 172–184. 


Barreto, L., Amaral, A., & Pereira, T (2017). Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: An 
overview, Procedia Manufacturing. 13, 1245–1252. 


Bhutia, P. W., & Phipon, R. (2012). Application of AHP and TOPSIS method for sup- 
plier selection problem, IOSR Journal of Engineering. 2(10), 43–50. 


Bohlender, G. , Kaufmann, A. , & Gupta, M. M. (1986). Introduction to fuzzy arithmetic . 
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company . 


Boran, F. E. , Genç, S. , Kurt, M. , & Akay, D. (2009). A multi-criteria intuitionistic fuzzy 
group decision making for supplier selection with TOPSIS method. Expert Sys- 
tems with Applications, 36 (8), 11363–11368 . 


Brettel, M. , Friederichsen, N. , Keller, M. , & Rosenberg, M. (2014). How virtualization, 
decentralization and network building change the manufacturing landscape: An 
industry 4.0 perspective. International Journal of Mechanical, Industrial Science 
and Engineering, 8 (1), 37–44 . 


Chang, C.-T. (2008). Revised multi-choice goal programming. Applied Mathematical 
Modelling, 32 (12), 2587–2595 . 


Chen, C.-T., Lin, C.-T., & Huang, S.-F. (2006). A fuzzy approach for supplier evaluation 
and selection in supply chain management. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 102 (2), 289–301. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpe.20 05.03.0 09 . 


Chen, T.-Y. (2015). The inclusion-based TOPSIS method with interval-valued intu- 
itionistic fuzzy sets for multiple criteria group decision making. Applied Soft 
Computing Journal, 26 , 57–73. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2014.09.015 . 


Chen, T.-Y., Wang, H.-P., & Lu, Y.-Y. (2011). A multicriteria group decision-making 
approach based on interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets: A comparative per- 
spective. Expert Systems with Applications, 38 (6), 7647–7658. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa. 
2010.12.096 . 


Corporation, R. E. (2015). Renesas electronics enables increased factory productivity 
for industry 4.0 with new industrial ethernet communication IC with built-in 
gigabit PHY. Retrieved 02/26, 2019, from https://www.renesas.com/us/en/about/ 
press-center/news/2015/news20150625.html 


De Felice, F. , Deldoost, M. H. , & Faizollahi, M. (2015). Performance measurement 
model for the supplier selection based on AHP. International Journal of Engineer- 
ing Business Management, 7 , 7–17 Godište 2015 . 


Dempster, A. P. (1967). Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued 
mapping. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 38 (2), 325–339. doi: 10.1214/ 
aoms/1177698950 . 


Devlin, N. , & Sussex, J. (2011). Incorporating multiple criteria in HTA. Methods and 
processes . London: Office of Health Economics . 


Dodgson, J. S. , Spackman, M. , Pearman, A. , & Phillips, L. D. (2009). Multi-criteria anal- 
ysis: A manual . London: Department for Communities and Local Government . 


Domingo Galindo, L. (2016). The challenges of logistics 4.0 for the supply chain man- 
agement and the information technology . NTNU . 



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0001

https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-0114(89)90205-4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0007

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2005.03.009

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2014.09.015

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.12.096

https://www.renesas.com/us/en/about/press-center/news/2015/news20150625.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0011

https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177698950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0014




24 M.M. Hasan, D. Jiang and A.M.M.S. Ullah et al. / Expert Systems With Applications 139 (2020) 112799 
Foroozesh, N. , Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. , & Mousavi, S. M. (2017). Resilient supplier 


selection in a supply chain by a new interval-valued fuzzy group decision model 
based on possibilistic statistical concepts. Journal of Industrial and Systems Engi- 
neering, 10 (2), 113–133 . 


Gan, J., Zhong, S., Liu, S., & Yang, D. (2019). Resilient supplier selection based on 
fuzzy BWM and GMo-RTOPSIS under supply chain environment. Discrete Dy- 
namics in Nature and Society, 2019 , 14. doi: 10.1155/2019/2456260 . 


Golden, B. L. , Wasil, E. A. , & Harker, P. T. (1989). The analytic hierarchy process. 
Applications and Studies . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg . 


Gregory, R. , Failing, L. , Harstone, M. , Long, G. , McDaniels, T. , & Ohlson, D. (2012). 
Structured decision making: A practical guide to environmental management 
choices . John Wiley & Sons . 


Guijun, W. , & Xiaoping, L. (1998). The applications of interval-valued fuzzy numbers 
and interval-distribution numbers. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 98 (3), 331–335 . 


Guneri, A. F. , Yucel, A. , & Ayyildiz, G. (2009). An integrated fuzzy-lp approach for 
a supplier selection problem in supply chain management. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 36 (5), 9223–9228 . 


Haibin, W. , Smarandache, F. , Zhang, Y. , & Sunderraman, R. (2010). Single valued neu- 
1116 trosophic sets. Review of the Air Force Academy , (1), 10 . 


Haldar, A. , Ray, A. , Banerjee, D. , & Ghosh, S. (2012). A hybrid MCDM model for re- 
silient supplier selection. International Journal of Management Science and Engi- 
neering Management, 7 (4), 284–292 . 


Haldar, A. , Ray, A. , Banerjee, D. , & Ghosh, S. (2014). Resilient supplier selection under 
a fuzzy environment. International Journal of Management Science and Engineer- 
ing Management, 9 (2), 147–156 . 


Hasan, M. M. , Shohag, M. A. S. , Azeem, A. , & Paul, S. (2015). Multiple criteria sup- 
plier selection: A fuzzy approach. International Journal of Logistics Systems and 
Management, 20 (4), 429–446 . 


Herrera, F., & Herrera-Viedma, E. (20 0 0). Linguistic decision analysis: Steps for 
solving decision problems under linguistic information. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 
115 (1), 67–82. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0114(99)0 0 024-X . 


Hofmann, E., & Rüsch, M. (2017). Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as 
future prospects on logistics, Computers in Industry , 89, 23–34. 


Hwang, C.-L. , Lai, Y.-J. , & Liu, T.-Y. (1993). A new approach for multiple objective 
decision making. Computers & Operations Research, 20 (8), 889–899 . 


i-SCOOP (2017a). Industry 4.0: The fourth industrial revolution – Guide to industrie 
4.0. Retrieved 01/26, 2019, from https://www.i- scoop.eu/industry- 4- 0/ 


i-SCOOP (2017b). Logistics 4.0 and smart supply chain management in indus- 
try 4.0. Retrieved 02/26, 2019, from https://www.i- scoop.eu/industry- 4- 0/ 
supply- chain- management- scm- logistics/#Logistics _ 40 _ the _ crucial _ aspect _ of _ 
autonomous _ decisions _ and _ applications 


Ivanov, D. , Dolgui, A. , Sokolov, B. , Werner, F. , & Ivanova, M. (2016). A dynamic model 
and an algorithm for short-term supply chain scheduling in the smart factory 
industry 4.0. International Journal of Production Research, 54 (2), 386–402 . 


Jiang, D., Hassan, M. M., & Faiz, T. I. (2018). A possibility distribution based 
multi-criteria decision algorithm for resilient supplier selection problems. arXiv 
preprint arXiv: 1806.01650 . 


Juhász, J., & Bányai, T. (2018). What industry 4.0 means for just-in-sequence supply in 
automotive industry? Paper presented at the Vehicle and Automotive Engineer- 
ing. 


Kamalahmadi, M., & Mellat-Parast, M. (2016). Developing a resilient supply chain 
through supplier flexibility and reliability assessment. International Journal of 
Production Research, 54 (1), 302–321. doi: 10.1080/00207543.2015.1088971 . 


Lakshmana Gomathi, Nayagam, V., Muralikrishnan, S., & Sivaraman, G. (2011). Multi- 
criteria decision-making method based on interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy 
sets. Expert Systems with Applications, 38 (3), 1464–1467. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2010. 
07.055 . 


Liao, C.-N., & Kao, H.-P. (2011). An integrated fuzzy TOPSIS and MCGP approach to 
supplier selection in supply chain management. Expert Systems with Applications, 
38 (9), 10803–10811. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2011.02.031 . 


Lo, H.-W. , & Liou, J. (2018). A novel multiple-criteria decision-making-based FMEA 
model for risk assessment. Applied Soft Computing, 73 , 684–696 . 


Mahapatra, G., Mahapatra, B., & Roy, P. (2016). A new concept for fuzzy variable 
based non-linear programming problem with application on system reliability 
via genetic algorithm approach. Annals of Operations Research, 247 (2), 853–866. 
doi: 10.1007/s10479-015-1863-z . 


Mohammad, I. (2012). Group decision making process for supplier selection with 
TOPSIS method under interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy numbers. Advances in 
Fuzzy Systems, 2012 (2012). doi: 10.1155/2012/407942 . 


Mühlbacher, A. C. , Kaczynski, A , & policy, h. (2016). Making good decisions in 
healthcare with multi-criteria decision analysis: The use, current research and 
future development of MCDA. Applied Health Economics and Health Policy, 14 (1), 
29–40 . 


Namdar, J., Li, X., Sawhney, R., & Pradhan, N. (2018). Supply chain resilience for 
single and multiple sourcing in the presence of disruption risks. International 
Journal of Production Research, 56 (6), 2339–2360. doi: 10.1080/00207543.2017. 
1370149 . 


Nutt, D. J. , King, L. A. , & Phillips, L. D. (2010). Drug harms in the UK: A multicriteria 
decision analysis. Lancet, 376 (9752), 1558–1565 . 


Prasad, K. , Prasad, M. , Rao, S. , & Patro, C. S. (2016). Supplier selection through AH- 
P-VIKOR integrated methodology. International Journal of Industrial Engineering, 
3 (5), 1–6 . 


Rai, A. , Patnayakuni, R. , & Seth, N. J. (2006). Firm performance impacts of digitally 
enabled supply chain integration capabilities. MIS Quarterly, 30 (2), 225–246 . 


Raiffa, H. , & Keeney, R. L. (1975). Decision Analysis with Multiple Conflicting Objec- 
tives, Preferences and Value Tradeoffs. IIASA Working Paper . Laxenburg, Austria: 
IIASA WP-75-053 . 


Ren, Z. , Xu, Z. , & Wang, H. (2018). Multi-criteria group decision-making based on 
quasi-order for dual hesitant fuzzy sets and professional degrees of decision 
makers. Applied Soft Computing, 71 , 20–35 . 


Rozados, I. V. , & Tjahjono, B. (2014). Big data analytics in supply chain management: 
Trends and related research. Paper presented at the 6th international conference 
on operations and supply chain management . 


Rüßmann, M. , Lorenz, M. , Gerbert, P. , Waldner, M. , Justus, J. , Engel, P. , & Har- 
nisch, M. (2015). Industry 4.0: The future of productivity and growth in manu- 
facturing industries. Boston Consulting Group, 9 (1), 54–89 . 


Saaty, T. L (1980). The analytic process: Planning, priority setting, resources allocation . 
New York: McGraw . 


Ş ahin, R., & Yi ̆gider, M. (2014). A Multi-criteria neutrosophic group decision making 
metod based TOPSIS for supplier selection. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1412.5077 . 


Shahroudi, K. , & Tonekaboni, S. M. S. (2012). Application of TOPSIS method to sup- 
plier selection in Iran auto supply chain. Journal of Global Strategic Management, 
12 , 123–131 . 


Sharif Ullah, A. M. M. (2005). A fuzzy decision model for conceptual design. Systems 
Engineering, 8 (4), 296–308. doi: 10.10 02/sys.20 038 . 


Sharif Ullah, A. M. M., & Shamsuzzaman, M. (2013). Fuzzy monte carlo simula- 
tion using point-cloud-based probability–possibility transformation. Simulation, 
89 (7), 860–875. doi: 10.1177/003754 97134 82174 . 


Sheffi, Y. , & Rice Jr, J. B. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT 
Sloan Management Review, 47 (1), 41–49 . 


Sheffi, Y. (2005). The resilient enterprise: Overcoming vulnerability for competitive ad- 
vantage : 1. MIT Press Book . 


Singh, A. (2016). A goal programming approach for supplier evaluation and demand 
allocation among suppliers. International Journal of Integrated Supply Manage- 
ment, 10 (1), 38–62 . 


Sodenkamp, M. A. , Tavana, M. , & Di Caprio, D. (2018). An aggregation method for 
solving group multi-criteria decision-making problems with single-valued neu- 
trosophic sets. Applied Soft Computing, 71 , 715–727 . 


SUPPLYCHAINDIVE (2018). Delivery issues jumped 50% as florence hit. 
Retrieved 02/26, 2019, from https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/ 
delivery- issues- jumped- 50- as- florence- hit/533049/ 


Thokala, P., Devlin, N., Marsh, K., Baltussen, R., Boysen, M., Kalo, Z., et al. (2016). 
Multiple criteria decision analysis for health care decision making—An intro- 
duction: Report 1 of the ISPOR MCDA emerging good practices task force. Value 
in Health, 19 (1), 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.12.003 . 


Torabi, S. A., Baghersad, M., & Mansouri, S. A. (2015). Resilient supplier selection and 
order allocation under operational and disruption risks. Transportation Research 
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 79 , 22–48. doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2015.03. 
005 . 


Ullah, A. M. M. S. (2005). Handling design perceptions: An axiomatic de- 
sign perspective. Research in Engineering Design, 16 (3), 109–117. doi: 10.1007/ 
s0 0163-0 05-0 0 02-2 . 


Ullah, A. M. M. S., & Noor-E-Alam, M. (2018). Big data driven graphical information 
based fuzzy multi criteria decision making. Applied Soft Computing, 63 , 23–38. 
doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2017.11.026 . 


Valipour Parkouhi, S., Safaei Ghadikolaei, A., & Fallah Lajimi, H. (2019). Resilient sup- 
plier selection and segmentation in grey environment. Journal of Cleaner Produc- 
tion, 207 , 1123–1137. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.10.007 . 


Wahlster, P. , Goetghebeur, M. , Kriza, C. , Niederländer, C. , & Kolomin- 
sky-Rabas, P. (2015). Balancing costs and benefits at different stages of 
medical innovation: A systematic review of multi-criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA). BMC Health Services Research, 15 (1), 262 . 


Waller, M. A. , & Fawcett, S. E. (2013). Data science, predictive analytics, and big data: 
A revolution that will transform supply chain design and management. Journal 
of Business Logistics, 34 (2), 77–84 . 


Wang, G. , Gunasekaran, A. , Ngai, E. W. , & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Big data analytics 
in logistics and supply chain management: Certain investigations for research 
and applications. International Journal of Production Economics, 176 , 98–110 . 


Wang, H. , Smarandache, F. , Sunderraman, R. , & Zhang, Y.-Q. (2005). Interval neu- 
trosophic sets and logic: theory and applications in computing . Phoenix, Arizona, 
USA: Hexis . 


Wen, J., Miaoyan, Z., & Chunhe, X. (2017). A reliability-based method to sensor data 
fusion. Sensors, 17 (7), 1575. doi: 10.3390/s17071575 . 


Witkowski, K. (2017). Internet of things, big data, industry 4.0–innovative solutions 
in logistics and supply chains management, Procedia Engineering. 182, 763–769. 


Yoon, K. (1987). A reconciliation among discrete compromise solutions. Journal of 
the Operational Research Society, 38 (3), 277–286 . 


Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8 (3), 338–353. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0019- 9958(65)90241- X . 


Zadeh, L. A. (1997). Toward a theory of fuzzy information granulation and its cen- 
trality in human reasoning and fuzzy logic. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 90 (2), 111–
127. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0114(97)0 0 077-8 . 


Zhong, R. Y. , Xu, X. , Klotz, E. , & Newman, S. T (2017). Intelligent manufacturing in 
the context of industry 4.0: A review. Engineering, 3 (5), 616–630 . 



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0015

https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2456260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0022a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0022a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0022a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0022a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0022a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0029a

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-0114(99)00024-X

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0023

https://www.i-scoop.eu/industry-4-0/

https://www.i-scoop.eu/industry-4-0/supply-chain-management-scm-logistics/#Logistics_40_the_crucial_aspect_of_autonomous_decisions_and_applications

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0024

http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01650

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1088971

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.07.055

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.02.031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0028

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0028

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0028

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0028

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-015-1863-z

https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/407942

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0031

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1370149

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038

http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.5077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038t

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038t

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038t

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0038t

https://doi.org/10.1002/sys.20038

https://doi.org/10.1177/0037549713482174

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/othref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0043

https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/delivery-issues-jumped-50-as-florence-hit/533049/

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2015.12.003

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2015.03.005

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163-005-0002-2

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.11.026

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.10.007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0052

https://doi.org/10.3390/s17071575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0054

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-9958(65)90241-X

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-0114(97)00077-8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0957-4174(19)30495-6/sbref0057


