









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641


2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2021.
10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.228


10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.228 2351-9789


© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2021.





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000   


     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 
   








2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)                                                                                                                                            
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


30th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2021) 
15-18 June 2021, Athens, Greece. 





Discrete Event Simulation and Digital Twins: Review and Challenges for 
Logistics 


 K. Agalianosa, S. T. Ponisa*, E. Aretoulakia, G. Plakasa, O. Efthymioub  
 aSchool of Mechanical Engineering, National Technical University Athens, Athens, Greece 


bTrade Logistics S.A., Athens, Greece 
 





* Corresponding author. Tel.: +30-210-772-2384 ; fax: +30-210-772-3571. E-mail address: staponis@central.ntua.gr  


Abstract 


In the Logistics 4.0 era, the demand for anticipating asset behaviour and make decisions in an almost real time fashion has led to 
the evolution of DES into an integral part of what is currently known as the Digital Twins (DTs). A Discrete Event Simulation 
software is assuming the role of the cyber twin, executing simulation software queries on real time data produced by IoT devices 
embedded on the physical twin, i.e. the automation, which are then processed, updating the simulation to the next system state. In 
that way, DTs facilitate the convergence of the physical and virtual warehouse, thus supporting efficient and responsive warehouse 
planning, management and decision making. This paper explores the current literature on the integration of DES and DTs and 
identifies trends and challenges for contemporary Logistics. 


© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


 Keywords: Warehouse Logistics, Discrete Event Simulation, Internet of Things, Logistics 4.0, Warehouse Automations, Digital Twins 


 
1. Introduction 


During the last decades, remarkable leaps in the fields of 
information technologies and digitalization have led to the 
creation of autonomous, web-based, self-regulating systems, 
widely described as Industry 4.0 [1]. Their effect on the 
competitive markets in the contemporary digital era is 
anticipated to be transformative [2]. In particular, the Industry 
4.0 paradigm is expected to enhance efficiency, flexibility, 
productivity, visibility, cybersecurity, the quality of products 
and services as well as facilitate decentralized decision-making 
processes [3], thus, revolutionizing companies’ competitive 
landscape. Its ultimate objective is to result in versatile 
“intelligent” enterprises [4], with a view to ameliorating their 
overall performance. 


Internet of Things (IoT) emerges as an essential driving 
force behind Industry 4.0, whose actualization into the real 
world is translated into the integration of a multitude of 
internet-linked technologies [5], enabling the aforementioned 
“smartification”. These technologies include “smart” 
embedded sensors, promoting the continuous exchange of real-
time data, with the aim of allowing connectivity with existing 
networks as well as device-to-device and human-to-device 
communication [6].  


Cloud computing plays an instrumental role in this endeavor 
by storing, processing and transferring the enormous amounts 
of data generated by various types of said sensors, in the cloud 
instead of the connected devices [7]. On the other hand, the 
emerging paradigm of edge computing, asserts that the data is 
processed at the network edge instead of the centralized cloud 
infrastructure addressing potential bandwidth, latency and 





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000   


     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 
   








2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)                                                                                                                                            
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


30th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2021) 
15-18 June 2021, Athens, Greece. 





Discrete Event Simulation and Digital Twins: Review and Challenges for 
Logistics 


 K. Agalianosa, S. T. Ponisa*, E. Aretoulakia, G. Plakasa, O. Efthymioub  
 aSchool of Mechanical Engineering, National Technical University Athens, Athens, Greece 


bTrade Logistics S.A., Athens, Greece 
 





* Corresponding author. Tel.: +30-210-772-2384 ; fax: +30-210-772-3571. E-mail address: staponis@central.ntua.gr  


Abstract 


In the Logistics 4.0 era, the demand for anticipating asset behaviour and make decisions in an almost real time fashion has led to 
the evolution of DES into an integral part of what is currently known as the Digital Twins (DTs). A Discrete Event Simulation 
software is assuming the role of the cyber twin, executing simulation software queries on real time data produced by IoT devices 
embedded on the physical twin, i.e. the automation, which are then processed, updating the simulation to the next system state. In 
that way, DTs facilitate the convergence of the physical and virtual warehouse, thus supporting efficient and responsive warehouse 
planning, management and decision making. This paper explores the current literature on the integration of DES and DTs and 
identifies trends and challenges for contemporary Logistics. 


© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


 Keywords: Warehouse Logistics, Discrete Event Simulation, Internet of Things, Logistics 4.0, Warehouse Automations, Digital Twins 


 
1. Introduction 


During the last decades, remarkable leaps in the fields of 
information technologies and digitalization have led to the 
creation of autonomous, web-based, self-regulating systems, 
widely described as Industry 4.0 [1]. Their effect on the 
competitive markets in the contemporary digital era is 
anticipated to be transformative [2]. In particular, the Industry 
4.0 paradigm is expected to enhance efficiency, flexibility, 
productivity, visibility, cybersecurity, the quality of products 
and services as well as facilitate decentralized decision-making 
processes [3], thus, revolutionizing companies’ competitive 
landscape. Its ultimate objective is to result in versatile 
“intelligent” enterprises [4], with a view to ameliorating their 
overall performance. 


Internet of Things (IoT) emerges as an essential driving 
force behind Industry 4.0, whose actualization into the real 
world is translated into the integration of a multitude of 
internet-linked technologies [5], enabling the aforementioned 
“smartification”. These technologies include “smart” 
embedded sensors, promoting the continuous exchange of real-
time data, with the aim of allowing connectivity with existing 
networks as well as device-to-device and human-to-device 
communication [6].  


Cloud computing plays an instrumental role in this endeavor 
by storing, processing and transferring the enormous amounts 
of data generated by various types of said sensors, in the cloud 
instead of the connected devices [7]. On the other hand, the 
emerging paradigm of edge computing, asserts that the data is 
processed at the network edge instead of the centralized cloud 
infrastructure addressing potential bandwidth, latency and 



http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.228&domain=pdf




 K. Agalianos  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641 1637
2 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000 


energy expenditure concerns [8]. Therefore, edge and cloud 
computing are complementing each other to achieve useful 
real-time automated, sense-and-respond feedback mechanisms. 


Cloud-based real-time data analysis provides information 
regarding the status and location of inherently mobile objects 
[9] as well as their surroundings [10], hence, improving 
parameter surveillance, monitoring and evaluation. 
Furthermore, intelligent robotic automations are capable of 
data processing and command execution, rendering them able 
to actuate, namely influence their environment [11]. In light of 
the above, the interoperability in the unified framework of IoT 
is inclined to drastically change industrial processes, 
predominantly contributing to optimizing warehouse 
operations. 


Warehouse operations, especially material handling (e.g. 
storage, picking etc.), are constructively strengthened through 
the adoption of IoT solutions. On a more detailed level, 
Industry 4.0 will trigger changes that affect material handling 
and in-house Logistics, through improvements in materials and 
information, robotics and cloud technologies, RFID, 
Autonomous Guided Vehicles (AGVs) and autonomous 
decisions and configuration of material handling systems [12].  
For example, “smart” sensors will be able to support constant 
inventory monitoring, generating replenishment alerts [13], 
with a view to subsequently minimizing operating expenses 
deriving from unmet customer needs or increasing unwanted 
items. Additionally, autonomous picking and packaging robots 
as well as collaborative robots working alongside humans, also 
known as “cobots”, seem to help reduce mistakes and increase 
efficiency [14]. Overall, it appears that IoT is disrupting 
Warehouse Logistics (WL) in a multifaceted manner, 
necessitating its adaptation to the new concept of Logistics 4.0. 


Nevertheless, notwithstanding obvious merits, IoT 
implementations tend to be intrinsically complex, therefore 
dictating the need for experimentation with several parameter 
settings, so as for any specified objectives to be accomplished. 
This need is conventionally accommodated with the support of 
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) software applications. 
Nonetheless, the growing demands for almost real-time 
decision making has resulted in the evolution of DES into a 
fundamental component of what is presently termed as the 
Digital Twins (DTs). 


In this paper, the current literature on the integration of DES 
and DTs in the warehouse is investigated, in order to recognize 
trends, limitations, future prospects and challenges for modern 
Logistics.  


2. The Role of Traditional Discrete Event Simulation 
Systems 


The use of simulation in its traditional design role is able to 
present a “smart” company with a major competitive advantage 
during development, deployment and execution of its plans and 
strategies. Simulations are achieved through the virtualization 
of processes with the use of tools, testing virtual models prior 
to real-world application and proven to assist with: i) predicting 
performance, such as latency, utilization and bottlenecks, ii) 
divulging how the diverse components of a system interact, iii) 
experimenting with and evaluating the merits of alternative 


scenarios, iv) providing a knowledgebase of system 
configuration, v) serving as a valuable means of demonstration 
and as a result of the above vi) supporting decision-making 
[15].  


 Discrete event simulation (DES) is a form of computer-
based modeling of a system as a discrete sequence of events. A 
major advantage of simulation over other operational research 
(OR) techniques is that it allows for experimentation with any 
element of a business system [16]. The term “discrete” refers 
to the simulation moving forward in time at mutually exclusive 
intervals. On account of the dynamic nature of the systems to 
be modeled, a mechanism for tracking the evolution of time is 
required. This is achieved by a tool called “simulation clock”, 
which varies with the occurrence of events. DES models 
employ two eminent approaches, as described above [17]: 


a) Next Event Time Advances (NETA): NETA is a 
mechanism determining the time of occurrence of futuristic 
events based on a list. Under this typical approach, the 
“simulation clock” is initialized to zero and between successive 
events, under no circumstances is a change in the system 
supposed to occur. 


b) Fixed Increment Time Advances (FITA): This alternative 
approach advances the “simulation clock” by a specified unit 
of time delta-t irrespective of the events. The system state is 
updated after examining the event list, so as to detect the 
possible occurrence of any event in past period of time delta-t.  


In general, NETA is more commonly used in simulation 
than FITA due to being less intricate [18].  


All in all, the efficiency of DES [19] and its flexibility 
stemming from its stochastic nature [20] render it suitable for 
being used in a broad spectrum of applications [21], including 
warehouse operations, as a means to validate the performance 
of various indicators, e.g. concerning material handling 
systems [22] or order-picking and product location strategies 
[23]. Still, the increase of computing processing power, the 
emergence of artificial intelligence and the expansion of IoT 
sensing in the modern warehouse has created the need and 
subsequently gave birth to a new kind of ‘simulation’ 
paradigm, called the ‘Digital Twin’ enabling the real-time 
control and digitization of a physical system.  


3. The Era of the Digital Twin Simulation Paradigm 


 “A digital twin (DT) is an integrated multi-physics, multi-
scale, probabilistic simulation of a complex product and uses 
the best available physical models, sensor updates, etc., to 
mirror the life of its corresponding twin” [24]. Thus, the 
concept of a DT, which is comprised of a physical entity in the 
physical world, a virtual entity in the virtual world and 
connected data tying the two worlds, is able to realize the 
convergence between physical and virtual space [25]. In the 
process of this interaction, the virtual entities are capable of 
interpreting data transmitted by the physical ones, therefore, 
grasping their state. In this way, dynamic changes are 
predicted, approximated and examined, allowing the physical 
entities to dynamically adjust, based on the optimized scheme 
from simulation, ultimately, creating a cyber-physical closed 
loop [26].       DT technology plays a crucial part in deploying 
the Industry 4.0 concepts by presenting companies with the 






1638 K. Agalianos  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000  3 


following benefits [27]: a) highly synchronized reflection of 
the physical space, b) juxtaposition between historical and real-
time data, c) interactions among physical objects, d) 
convergence between physical and virtual space [28] and e) 
continuous improvement of the virtual model [29], since it can 
be overlapped with a physical object feeding real-time data, 
being processed in an inconspicuous manner [30]. 
      The abovementioned advantages are proven to be 
exceptionally useful, in the field of warehouse logistics, in 
which the flow of products is contingent on the orchestration 
of a plethora of elements in a multi-stakeholder environment.  
DTs’ added value lies in the optimization of the infrastructure, 
eliminating errors and delays [31]. In the next section, a short 
review on the integration of traditional DES approaches with 
the new DT paradigm is presented, followed by a discussion on 
the findings, highlighting current research challenges and 
identifying future research opportunities and implementation 
priorities. 


4.  Review  


A literature review was carried out, in order to identify and 
critically evaluate the findings of peer-reviewed studies, 
pertaining to the integration of DES and DTs in the warehouse. 
The data collection process was conducted on January 19, 
2020, based on papers from the Scopus database, using a query 
of the key word terms “(Discrete Event Logistics OR DES) OR 
(Digital Twin* OR DT*) AND (Warehouse Logistics)”. Please 
note that the asterisk (*) at the end of a key word ensures the 
inclusion of the term in both singular and plural forms as well 
as its derivatives. Further research results added on a later date 
to the Scopus database, are, therefore, not included in this 
study. This query was entered into Scopus’s default tab 
(Document Search form), followed by the selection of the 
search field “Article Title, Abstract, Keywords”. 


This initial search yielded 49 results. This number decreased 
after limiting “Year” to exclusively include papers after 2015, 
when it was made clear that the exploration of potential use 
cases for digital twins across the logistics space became 
worthwhile, thus, amounting to 29 results. After meticulously 
examining their content, namely their abstract, keywords, table 
of contents and main body, several papers were deemed 
inadmissible, on account of lacking relevance. Furthermore, we 
were not able to retrieve the full text of a number of papers, 
thereby reducing the final sample size to 14 papers. 


Grey literature was, additionally, examined through the 
websites of logistics and consulting companies, with the aim of 
unraveling significant information unavailable in 
commercially published literature. Finally, manual searching 
was complementarily pursued to fill the remaining knowledge 
gaps.  


The final sample size resulting from the data collection 
process, namely fourteen (14) papers, explores the application 
of DES in WL almost in its entirety.  


Starting with the works of Korth et al. [32], one can see the 
use of DES and DT in tandem for a critical real-time use case 
in logistics, i.e. creating the digital twin of a warehouse used 
for shift planning of blue-collar workers and time window 
planning. The authors argue about the need of an efficient 


integration of DES into a DT architecture in real-time logistics 
use cases by separating the static and dynamic parts of the 
model making past, present and future of the logistics system 
efficiently available for decision support in the same semantic 
and syntactic data model. In particular, unstable non-linear 
business conditions have demonstrated a requirement for more 
transparency in daily planning which can be met by DES. 
However, a tool transferring the decisions to the DES, while at 
the same time mirroring the current warehouse situation is also 
of paramount importance. In this study, these needs were 
accommodated through a DT with DES capability. When a 
decision scenario is complete, it is assessed by DES, which 
plays through the scenario and creates measurements. Then, the 
decisions are modified until satisfactory results are achieved.  


In a similar vein, Ashrafian et al. [33] used the analysis 
software Flexsim to perform a DES model of a fully automated 
modular conveyor system, so as to alleviate impaired material 
flow, caused by bottlenecks. The data used to carry out DES 
was gathered from the system over one week of operation and 
amounted to roughly 500,000 totes. During this process, the 
authors identified some requirements for rendering DES 
modeling an instrumental tool for DTs. The authors elucidated 
the importance of accomplishing connectivity to the 
operational resource planning database. A high level of detail 
in all aspects of the modelled system was also deemed an 
essential factor. Moreover, manual modifications of a DES 
model can be time consuming, especially if a plethora of 
scenarios need to be tested. Hence, with a view to enhancing 
decision-making and achieving optimization without manual 
interventions, the development of various model versions 
should be automated to the highest degree possible.  


       Rabe and Dross [34] presented the architecture and 
working principles of a simulation-based Decision Support 
System (DSS) predicting the repercussions of possible 
changes, for logistics networks, with the support of a data-
driven DES model. The system was tested with data from over 
100 warehouses in different countries through the collaboration 
with a large, international trading company. The data were 
collected from the Data Warehouse (DWH) in predefined 
periods and the simulation tool used for the implementation 
was SimChain. Cooper et al. [35] proposed a cost-to-serve 
model, which they implemented as a DES, in order to cost-
effectively assess the delivery frequency, as a result of the 
potential addition of a cross-dock node between Distribution 
Centers (DCs) and stores to a supply chain network. The DES 
was fed input data concerning product characteristics, store 
locations, and demand, truck routes for store delivery from the 
DC or the cross dock and delivery schedules from suppliers to 
the DC. 
     van Lier et al. [36] performed a DES to analyze the potential 
internal horizontal collaboration among three neighboring 
DCs. In particular, they evaluated a scenario in which outbound 
product flows are gathered in a hypothetical cross-dock 
situated next to the three DCs. In order to carry out the DES, a 
data set of load orders from the three DCs was collected over 
10 weeks of operation. In [37], Rosi et al. presented an 
evaluation of the performance of an automated single-tray 
Vertical Lift Module (VLM) warehouse system by using DES 






 K. Agalianos  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641 1639
4 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000 


technique. The aim of this paper was to investigate VLM’s 
benefits in regards to decreasing transactions’ mean cycle time.    
      Sun et al. [38] designed an automated warehouse sorting 
system, whose feasibility was verified by experiments in a 
small scale bag manufacturing enterprise through the 
application of a DES model, using the popular simulation tool 
“AutoMod” (http://www.automod.se/eng/home.html). 
Burinskiene et al. [39] presented a DES analysis of various 
inner-warehouse transportation processes, in an attempt to 
reduce waste. The results indicated that 67% of waste in 
warehouses could be avoided. Merschformann et al. [40] 
simulated pick and replenishment processes, order assignment 
as well as pod selection and storage assignment problems in a 
robotized, parts-to-picker material handling system, using 
DES, by evaluating multiple decision rules per problem. Zhang 
et al. [41] proposed a new service mode for final vehicle 
assembly and logistics, which was simulated based on data 
from AnJi Automobile Logistics Company by a DES software 
called “Flexsim” (https://www.flexsim.com/). Viet et al. [42] 
used a DES and a simulation-based scheduling algorithm, as 
decision support tools to evaluate the information flows, 
planning daily warehouse operations, through a case study of 
the distribution process in a Dutch floricultural supply chain.  
      Smith and Srinivas [43] proposed and compared various 
truck check-in policies to be applied to warehouse receiving 
processes, using DES models. Their objective was to minimize 
detention fees paid to the carrier as well as reduce CO2 
emissions. At the same time, Timperio et al. [44] provided a 
hands-on decision support framework integrating Multi-
Criteria Decision Making (MCDM), network optimization and 
DES to address distribution network design and transport 
optimization. The results demonstrated 18%-22% cost saving 
in transportation and warehousing along with 30% reduction in 
CO2 emissions. 


Finally, one has to note the excellent efforts of Brenner and 
Hummel [45] at the University of Reutlingen in building an 
innovative digital shop floor management system. The program 
aims to implement the intralogistics concept in the lab of the 
ESB Logistics Learning Factory with sensor mounted 
autonomous navigating transport vehicles and dynamic 
logistics and production processes. 
      As it can be inferred, based on the coding criteria imposed, 
during the last five (5) years the concept of DES was utilized 
in a variety of applications, whose common objective was the 
validation or refutation of a hypothesis to be implemented in 
the context of warehouse logistics.  Conversely, DTs are a 
relatively new powerful tool justifying the lack of scientific 
research on their application to warehouse logistics thus far. 
The authors of this paper mostly turned to grey literature, which 
provided considerable insights, so as to overcome the 
deficiency of scientific studies pertinent to the subject. 
     The sole relevant study retrieved in Scopus was an article 
by Petković et al. [46] who proposed a human intention 
estimation algorithm which realistically simulates worker 
behaviour in robotized warehouse settings. With the aim of 
exhibiting the scalability of their approach to larger 
warehouses, the authors not having the use of a full-scale 
commercial warehouse for testing, carried out intention 
estimation experiments in a large warehouse virtual reality 


(VR) DT. The experiments proved that the proposed 
framework estimates warehouse employee intentions with 
great accuracy. 
     On the other hand, grey literature pointed to the works of 
Dohrmann et al. [31], who through expressing DHL’s 
perspective, shed light on the effect of warehouse DTs on the 
optimization of a logistics facility. In particular, using a 3D 
model of the infrastructure itself fed by IoT data harvested from 
a plethora of automation technologies, DTs enable companies 
to create vivid simulation scenarios, predicting the movement 
of products, personnel, and material handling equipment, thus, 
contributing to space utilization optimization, reduced energy 
expenditure as well as improved employee productivity. The 
IoT data mostly refer to inventory levels, demanded quantities, 
item location and characteristics etc. DHL implemented this 
technology for an international packaging group’s warehouse 
(Tetra Pak), where the cyber twin was fed IoT data from 
warehouse’s forklift trucks [47]. In this context, a retail 
company employed DT technology, in order to simulate its 
current operations, with the aim of ameliorating the overall 
flow of products in one of its fresh food warehouses. Two 
different layouts were tested for manifold scenarios, so as to 
assess the change in performance measures, hence, amplifying 
decision-making [48]. 


Rosemann [49] discussed the trust and transparency in 
partner and consumer relationships, as a result of network 
visibility provided by DTs, concluding that the implementation 
of DTs leads to improved collaboration and increased 
consumer confidence respectively. 
     Last but not least, in their handbook, Ivanov et al. [1] 
referred to how DTs are able to provide end-to-end supply 
chain (SC) visibility, while interacting with other SC 
management tools. In the event of a disturbance in a warehouse 
process, the urgent state can be reflected by a risk data 
monitoring tool and passed on to the virtual model of the DT, 
which helps forecast possible disruption propagation, assess its 
ramifications, experiment with potential recovery policies and 
verify the adherence to contingency plans.  
      Taking into consideration all of the above, it can be 
deduced that the implementation of DTs –or rather the 
integration of DES approaches with DTs- in the field of 
warehouse logistics is still at a primitive stage, yet, it presents 
promising potential for future applications.  


5. Conclusion 


Discrete Event Simulation and digital twins share a lot of 
characteristics, which sometimes lead researchers and mostly 
practitioners to misconceptions. It is true, that sometimes a 
digital twin can be used as an initial structure for building a 
DES model and at the same time an initial simulation effort 
could later be expanded so that physical simulation (twinning) 
is possible. It is only when these two discrete worlds merge, 
when an actual digital twin is created duplicating the physical 
model and providing monitoring and controlling capabilities 
based on  real-time data from various sensors, while at the same 
time producing forecasts and future state estimations with the 
support of machine learning and AI techniques embedded in 
the system. Currently, most of the available DES software 






1640 K. Agalianos  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000  5 


solutions are still process-based scheduling applications. Still, 
there is an increasing trend for enhancing DES functionalities 
offering real-time simulation scheduling. 


In this paper, the authors attempt to clarify these two terms 
and showcase their differences, but most importantly highlight 
interesting research efforts as retrieved by reviewing the 
available literature at the intersection of these two system 
modelling approaches, with an emphasis on logistics. As it is 
evident by the number and the level of maturity of reviewed 
documents, the research efforts are currently at an embryonic 
stage of development. More research is needed and fortunately 
is welcomed and expected by both the industry and academia, 
as a result of Industry 4.0 growth driving adoption of closely 
interrelated technologies, such as Additive Manufacturing, IoT 
Sensors and IoT devices. The need for DES and DT models 
will be further enhanced by the increasing trend of real-time 
scheduling and decision making supporting intelligent 
enterprises in handling business process exceptions such as 
machine failures and rescheduling based on the updated system 
conditions. DES software is traditionally used for addressing 
these kinds of business issues. In the near future, when 
‘sensing’ shop floor data will become vastly available, DES 
and DT applications will be able to execute real time 
simulations and provide almost real time solutions enhancing 
performance of both manufacturing and logistics processes. To 
that end, future research should focus on addressing the 
limitations and complying with the requirements for integrating 
DES into DTs, followed by applying uses cases of DES and DT 
in tandem, so as to enrich current knowledge and progress the 
discipline forward. 


Acknowledgements 


      The present work is co-funded by the European Union and 
Greek national funds through the Operational Program 
"Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" 
(EPAnEK), under the call “RESEARCH-CREATE-
INNOVATE” (project code: T1EDK-01168 & acronym: 
SMARTFLEX Warehouse). 


References 


[1] Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Das, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). Digital Supply 
Chain Twins: Managing the Ripple Effect, Resilience, and Disruption 
Risks by Data-Driven Optimization, Simulation, and Visibility. In 
Handbook of Ripple Effects in the Supply Chain (pp. 309-332). Springer, 
Cham. 


 
[2] Geissbauer R, Vedso J, Schrauf S (2016) Industry 4.0: building the digital 


enterprise. In: 2016 Global Industry 4.0 survey. PricewaterhouseCoopers 
LLP.https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/industries-4.0/landing-
page/industry-4.0-building-your-digital-enterprise-april-2016.pdf 


 
[3] Dalmarco, G., Ramalho, F. R., Barros, A. C., & Soares, A. L. (2019). 


Providing Industry 4.0 technologies: the case of a production technology 
cluster. The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 30(2), 
100355. 


 
[4] Schönsleben, P., Fontana, F., & Duchi, A. (2017). What Benefits do 


Initiatives Such as Industry 4.0 Offer for Production Locations in High-
wage Countries?. Procedia CIRP, 63, 179-183. 





[5] Armentano, R., Bhadoria, R. S., Chatterjee, P., & Deka, G. C. (2017). The 
Internet of Things: Foundation for Smart Cities, EHealth, and Ubiquitous 
Computing. Chapman and Hall/CRC. 


 
[6] Lee, I., & Lee, K. (2015). The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, 


investments, and challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons, 58(4), 431-
440. 


 
[7] Bokefode, J. D., Bhise, A. S., Satarkar, P. A., & Modani, D. G. (2016). 


Developing a secure cloud storage system for storing IoT data by 
applying role based encryption. Procedia Computer Science, 89, 43-50. 


 
[8] Ai, Y., Peng, M., & Zhang, K. (2018). Edge computing technologies for 


Internet of Things: a primer. Digital Communications and Networks, 4(2), 
77-86. 


 
[9] Ibarra-Esquer, J., González-Navarro, F., Flores-Rios, B., Burtseva, L., & 


Astorga-Vargas, M. (2017). Tracking the evolution of the internet of things 
concept across different application domains. Sensors, 17(6), 1379. 


 
[10] Lee, G. M., Crespi, N., Choi, J. K., & Boussard, M. (2013). Internet of 


things. In Evolution of Telecommunication Services (pp. 257-282). 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 


 
[11] Coetzee, L., & Eksteen, J. (2011). Internet of things–promise for the 


future? An Introduction. 
 
[12] Efthymiou, O. Κ., & Ponis, S. T. (2019). Current Status of Industry 4.0 


in Material Handling Automation and In-house Logistics. International 
Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, 13(10), 1370-1374. 


 
[13] Tang, C. S., & Veelenturf, L. P. (2019). The Strategic Role of Logistics 


in the Industry 4.0 Era. Forthcoming in: Transportation Research Part E: 
Logistics and Transportation Review. 


 
[14] El Zaatari, S., Marei, M., Li, W., & Usman, Z. (2019). Cobot 


programming for collaborative industrial tasks: An overview. Robotics 
and Autonomous Systems, 116, 162-180. 


 
[15] Gunal, M. M. Simulation for Industry 4.0. (2019). Retrieved from: 


https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04137-3 
 
[16] Ponis, S. T., Delis, A., Gayialis, S. P., Kasimatis, P., & Tan, J. (2013). 


Applying discrete event simulation (DES) in healthcare: the case for 
outpatient facility capacity planning. International Journal of Healthcare 
Information Systems and Informatics (IJHISI), 8(3), 58-79. 


 
[17] Law, A. M., Kelton, W. D., & Kelton, W. D. (2000). Simulation 


modeling and analysis (Vol. 3). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 
[18] Tang, J., Leu, G., & Abbass, H. A. (2019). Simulation and 


Computational Red Teaming for Problem Solving. John Wiley & Sons. 
 
[19] Correa Espinal, A. A., Gomez Montoya, R. A., & Sanchez Alzate, J. A. 


(2012). Improvement of operations of picking and dispatch for a business 
in the mattress industry, supported by discrete simulation. Dyna, 79(173), 
104-112. 


 
[20] Tako, A. A., & Robinson, S. (2012). The application of discrete event 


simulation and system dynamics in the logistics and supply chain context. 
Decision support systems, 52(4), 802-815. 


 
[21] Karnon, J., Stahl, J., Brennan, A., Caro, J. J., Mar, J., & Möller, J. 


(2012). Modeling using discrete event simulation: a report of the ISPOR-
SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task Force–4. Medical 
decision making, 32(5), 701-711. 


 
[22] Potrč, I., Lerher, T., Kramberger, J., & Šraml, M. (2004). Simulation 


model of multi-shuttle automated storage and retrieval systems. Journal of 
Materials Processing Technology, 157, 236-244. 


 






 K. Agalianos  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1636–1641 1641
6 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000 


[23] Amato, F., Basile, F., Carbone, C., & Chiacchio, P. (2005). An approach 
to control automated warehouse systems. Control Engineering Practice, 
13(10), 1223-1241 


 
[24] Glaessgen, E., & Stargel, D. (2012, April). The digital twin paradigm for 


future NASA and US Air Force vehicles. In 53rd 
AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and 
Materials Conference 20th AIAA/ASME/AHS Adaptive Structures 
Conference 14th AIAA (p. 1818). 


 
[25] Grieves, M. (2014). Digital twin: Manufacturing excellence through 


virtual factory replication. White paper, 1-7. 
 
[26] Rosen, R., Von Wichert, G., Lo, G., & Bettenhausen, K. D. (2015). 


About the importance of autonomy and digital twins for the future of 
manufacturing. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(3), 567-572. 


 
[27] Tao, F., Cheng, J., Qi, Q., Zhang, M., Zhang, H., & Sui, F. (2018). 


Digital twin-driven product design, manufacturing and service with big 
data. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 
94(9-12), 3563-3576. 


 
[28] Gabor, T., Belzner, L., Kiermeier, M., Beck, M. T., & Neitz, A. (2016, 


July). A simulation-based architecture for smart cyber-physical systems. 
In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing 
(ICAC) (pp. 374-379). IEEE. 


 
[29] Tuegel, E. J., Ingraffea, A. R., Eason, T. G., & Spottswood, S. M. 


(2011). Reengineering aircraft structural life prediction using a digital 
twin. International Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2011. 


 
[30] Posada, J., C. Toro, I. Barandiaran, D. Oyarzun, D. Stricker, R. Amicis, 


E. Pinto, P. Eisert, J. D ¨ollner,and I. Vallarino. 2015. “Visual Computing 
as Key Enabling Technology for Industry 4.0 & IndustrialInternet”. IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications 35(2):26–40 


 
[31] Dohrmann, Κ., Gesing, Β., & Ward J. (2019). Digital Twins in Logistics. 


Retrieved January 20, 2020, from 
https://www.logistics.dhl/content/dam/dhl/global/core/documents/pdf/glo-
core-digital-twins-in-logistics.pdf 


 
[32] Korth, B., Schwede, C., & Zajac, M. (2018, December). Simulation-


ready digital twin for realtime management of logistics systems. In 2018 
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) (pp. 4194-4201). 
IEEE. 


 
[33] Ashrafian, A., Pettersen, O. G., Kuntze, K. N., Franke, J., Alfnes, E., 


Henriksen, K. F., & Spone, J. (2019, September). Full-Scale Discrete 
Event Simulation of an Automated Modular Conveyor System for 
Warehouse Logistics. In IFIP International Conference on Advances in 
Production Management Systems (pp. 35-42). Springer, Cham. 


 
[34] Rabe, M., & Dross, F. (2015, December). A reinforcement learning 


approach for a decision support system for logistics networks. In 2015 
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC) (pp. 2020-2032). IEEE. 


 
[35] Cooper, K., Wikum, E., & Tew, J. (2014, December). Evaluating cost-to-


serve for a retail supply chain. In Proceedings of the 2014 Winter 
Simulation Conference (pp. 1955-1964). IEEE Press. 


 
[36] van Lier, T., Caris, A., & Macharis, C. (2016). Sustainability SI: 


Bundling of outbound freight flows: Analyzing the potential of internal 


horizontal collaboration to improve sustainability. Networks and Spatial 
Economics, 16(1), 277-302. 


 
[37] Rosi, B., Grašić, L., Đukić, G., Opetuk, T., & Lerher, T. (2016). 


Simulation-based performance analysis of automated single-tray vertical 
lift module. International journal of simulation modelling, 15(1), 97-108. 


 
[38] Sun, X., Wu, C. C., & Chen, L. R. (2018, May). An Automated 


Warehouse Sorting System for Small Manufacturing Enterprise Applying 
Discrete Event Simulation. In 2018 2nd IEEE Advanced Information 
Management, Communicates, Electronic and Automation Control 
Conference (IMCEC) (pp. 1597-1601). IEEE. 


 
[39] Burinskiene, A., Lorenc, A., & Lerher, T. (2018). A simulation study for 


the sustainability and reduction of waste in warehouse logistics. 
International Journal of Simulation Modelling (IJSIMM), 17(3). 


 
[40] Merschformann, M., Lamballais, T., de Koster, R., & Suhl, L. (2018). 


Decision rules for robotic mobile fulfillment systems. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1801.06703. 


 
[41] Zhang, X., Liu, Y., & Zhou, X. Research on sequencing of mixed-model 


assembly line and logistics system modeling in automobile composite 
assembly distribution center. In 2018 International Conference on 
Advanced Mechatronic Systems (ICAMechS) (pp. 72-77). IEEE. 


 
[42] Viet, N. Q., Behdani, B., & Bloemhof, J. (2018). Value of information to 


improve daily operations in high-density logistics. International Journal 
on Food System Dynamics, 9(1), 1-20. 


 
[43] Smith, D., & Srinivas, S. (2019). A simulation-based evaluation of 


warehouse check-in strategies for improving inbound logistics 
operations. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 94, 303-320. 


 
[44] Timperio, G., Tiwari, S., Gaspar Sánchez, J. M., García Martín, R. A., & 


de Souza, R. (2019). Integrated decision support framework for 
distribution network design. International Journal of Production Research, 
1-20. 


 
[45] Brenner, B., & Hummel, V. (2017). Digital twin as enabler for an 


innovative digital shopfloor management system in the ESB Logistics 
Learning Factory at Reutlingen-University. Procedia Manufacturing, 9, 
198-205. 


 
[46] Petković, T., Puljiz, D., Marković, I., & Hein, B. (2019). Human intention 


estimation based on hidden Markov model motion validation for safe 
flexible robotized warehouses. Robotics and Computer-Integrated 
Manufacturing, 57, 182-196. 


 
[47] Rusch, B. (2019, August 7). In the Tetra Pak warehouse in Singapore, 


the twin is in charge - Digital Twin. Retrieved January 21, 2019, from 
https://www.hannovermesse.de/en/news/news-articles/in-the-tetra-pak-
warehouse-in-singapore-the-twin-is-in-charge 


 
[48] LTP. (2019). Warehouse operations using a digital twin. Retrieved 


January 21, 2020, from https://www.ltplabs.com/cases/warehouse-
operations-using-a-digital-twin 


 
[49] Rosemann, M. (2018, August 16). Transparency and Trust: The 


Hallmarks Of Digital Twins In Logistics. Retrieved January 21, 2020, 
from https://www.digitalistmag.com/digital-supply-networks/2018/08/16/ 
transparency-trust-hallmarks-of-digital-twins-in-logistics-06183473 








