









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Industrial Marketing Management


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman


Research paper


Shifts in buyer-seller relationships: A retrospective on Handfield and Bechtel
(2002)


Robert Handfield⁎


Bank of America University, Poole College of Management, Campus Box 7229, NC State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7229, United States of America


A B S T R A C T


One of the most highly cited papers in the Industrial Marketing Management journal was published 17 years ago, and proposed a strong linkage in the elements of
buyer-seller trust, asset specificity, contracts, and supply chain performance. In this paper, explore the question of “what has changed”? We note that the emergence
of 1) real-time analytic technologies, 2) new governance models that span multiple parties across organizations in a supply chain network, and 3) new digital
innovation requiring partnering with new entities are required to produce end to end analytical capabilities. We offer three new propositions that provide some
insights towards future research areas, and we also note that although interpersonal buyer-seller relationships will remain important, digital transformation is
changing the nature of how these will unfold. Our propositions provide insights on how the role of technology and other shifts in the supply chain ecosystem is
shifting the role of buyers and sellers in the industrial landscape. I offer these insights in the hope that they may provide a basis for future researchers to engage in
research in the field of emerging industrial buyer-seller relationships, and devote this paper to the memory of Christian.


1. Introduction


In a paper that became one of the top cited papers in IMM, Christian
Bechtel and I published a paper on the importance of trust between
buyers and sellers in achieving supply chain agility.1 This study ad-
vanced our thesis that creating new relational forms of governance
between buyers and sellers required an increased reliance on trust,
more so than contractual governance. Our empirical results suggested
that to build relationships based on trust, suppliers had to demonstrate
a commitment, by investing in in site-specific and human assets dedi-
cated to the relationship. In turn, buying companies needed to be more
thoughtful in how they structured and engaged in contracts to control
for relative levels of dependence within the relationship.


These developments also included elements such as the degree of
dependence, the level of people engaged in the relationship and the
level of trust that existed between the parties. In the presence of these
elements, we found that the outcome was that buyers experienced
quicker and improved supply chain responsiveness, with both parties
enjoying the benefits of greater volume (for the supplier) and improved
performance (for the buyer).


What has changed since this paper was published? Although in-
dustrial marketing research has explored many of the important con-
cepts behind buyer-seller relationships, have more trusting relation-
ships been fully embraced by industrial buyers during this period? For


instance, the need for greater collaboration and information sharing
between industrial procurement and marketing is recognized as a cri-
tical element for supply chain integration in several literature reviews
and special issues of Industrial Marketing Management (Ivens, Pardo, &
Tunisini, 2009; Johnsen, 2018; Lindgreen, Campello, & Angell, 2016).
But have practices on the part of industrial marketing and procurement
really shifted along with the theoretical shifts proposed in the industrial
buyer-seller literature? And a second related question is whether the
rapid shifts in digital supply chains occurring within the last decade
have downplayed the need for of interpersonal and trusting buyer-seller
relationships in the supply chain?


In this paper, I propose that velocity has become the key perfor-
mance outcome in modern supply chains. As a result of the need for
quicker outcomes, there will be a need for more efficient decision-
making based on real-time data. Because of these changes in the eco-
system, we propose three major shifts have permanently changed the
way that industrial marketing and purchasing managers work interact,
as shown in Fig. 1:


• Technology development, brought about by the massive changes in
cloud computing, real-time data, social media, “big data”, artificial
intelligence, block chain, and smart contracts, have created a need
for more frequent and quicker engagement in buyer-seller re-
lationships. (Handfield & Linton, 2017)


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.08.012
Received 31 January 2019; Received in revised form 1 August 2019; Accepted 21 August 2019


⁎ Poole College of Management, CB 7229, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7229, United States of America.
E-mail address: Robert_handfield@ncsu.edu.


1 Handfield and Bechtel (2002). The role of trust and relationship structure in improving supply chain responsiveness. Industrial Marketing Management, 31(4),
267–382.


Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


Available online 31 August 2019
0019-8501/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00198501

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.08.012

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.08.012

mailto:Robert_handfield@ncsu.edu

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.08.012

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.08.012&domain=pdf




• The expansion of industrial buyer-seller relationships is moving
beyond the interpersonal dimension, and is no longer between
purchasing managers and sales agents. Although documented well
in the literature, the need for cross-functional alignment today re-
quires that data is shared in real time across multiple stakeholders,
requiring governance mechanisms to promote increased alignment
in defining contractual scopes of work, as well as on-going man-
agement of contractual outcomes in the face of uncertainty (Toon,
Morgan, Lindgreen, Vanhamme, & Hingley, 2016; Wynstra,
Weggeman, & van Weele, 2003). This is a significant change in-
volving ways of working.


• Suppliers as a source of innovation has been well documented in
prior research, but again the need for quicker time to market re-
cognizes that shared risks and rewards must be established often in
new industries and domains that do not have strong prior relation-
ships in place. This includes not only the development and com-
mercialization of the product, but also the product launch and life
cycle management, which often involves new technology develop-
ment between industrial buying and supplying parties (Handfield,
Ragatz, Monczka, & Peterson, 1999; Gonzalez-Zapatero, Gonzalez-
Benito, & Lannelongue, 2016).


Increasing shifts to a digital ecosystem have escalated in the last
5 years, due to major changes in the global economy and emerging
technology. The explosion of data, cloud-based computing, and the rise
of other forms of technological innovations have allowed organizations
to access more data than ever before in real-time. Real-time data can be
transmitted within 15 s or less, a fact that enables managers to under-
stand and predict what internal users and customers will need right
now (Handfield & Linton, 2017). During this same period, rapidly
shifting demand and global events have led to the recognition that re-
sponse velocity is the key ingredient for managing uncertainty in global
supply chains. How have these digital technologies shifted the role of
industrial marketing and procurement? I note in this paper that al-
though the nature of buyer-seller relationships is well understood in the
research, three major shifts in the ecosystem are new, and the effects on
industrial marketing relationships are still unfolding. I offer some in-
sights on how these changes may play out in the years ahead, and
present a framework for exploration of these issues for future re-
searchers.


First, the ability to disperse supply chain data rapidly has been
enabled through development of technological capabilities that provide
inexpensive cloud-based computing, distributed computing ‘at the
edge’, and the growth of a digital ecosystem (Handfield & Linton,


2017). While the issue of visibility has been invoked for many years
(Barratt & Adegoke, 2007), we are only now seeing the technology that
makes real-time data a reality (Handfield & Linton, 2017). Even
Galbraith (1974) predicted that one day the emergence of online, real-
time structures producing instantaneous information would have
powerful ramifications in terms of organization structures that would
be needed to process this change: “Information is a source of power,
and so the present power structure is threatened. Most of our attitudes
and behaviors still reflect hierarchical and sequential processing of
data.” (p. 42, Galbraith, 1974). As such, collaboration in a velocity-
driven era requires a different set of norms for managing industrial
buyer-seller relationships, requiring differentiated approaches for
managing event transparency, visibility material flows, and a time-de-
fined component (Chen, Preston, & Swink, 2015; Oliveira & Handfield,
2018).


A second change is that increased response velocity will requires a
new form of governance over buyer and seller relationships, which now
typically consist of multiple stakeholders linked in networked supply
chains. Prior industrial marketing research has established that in-
dividuals are no longer the sole decision-makers in B2B relationships,
but that multiple stakeholders are playing a role (Handfield, Cousins,
Lawson, & Petersen, 2015; Rinehart, Eckert, Handfield, Page, & Atkin,
2003). Supply management executives themselves recognize that they
cannot operate in a void, and have begun to establish contractual
performance objectives that extend to total cost models spanning
multiple entities in supply chain networks. The field of supply man-
agement once had a love affair with the notion of strategic sourcing,
which sought quick price reductions through volume leveraging, to the
exclusion of the most important party in the supply chain: the internal
customer. As this shift has occurred, procurement organizations have
moved more towards a team-based approach to supply management,
one in which procurement is no longer the sole decision-maker, but acts
as a facilitator to lead a team-based decision, that must also convey the
upsteam and downstream impacts of performance (This shift was
documented in a white paper emerging from a workshop we held in
2017 of chief procurement offers and business development execu-
tives).


However, technology and governance over procurement decisions
are only part of the story. The third leg of the stool is related to the
reliance of large companies on new providers of digital services to drive
innovation. The reliance on external suppliers for innovation has been
well documented in industrial marketing research, and has occurred in
conjunction due to mergers and growth in the size of Fortune 500
companies. Many of these companies have begun to shed R&D


Shifts to Relationships
Contracts


Site Asset Specificity
(Human or Otherwise)Trust


Velocity as the
Performance Outcome


Real-time Analytics
Real-time performance
Multiple data sources
Linkages to customer goals
Personalized views by role


Multi-Stakeholder
Relationships:  


Measurement
Communication
Congruent capabilities
Quicker response


Shared Innovation Risk
Joint product life cycle 
Co-development  - product portfolios
Shared geographical expansion
On-site suppliers sharing risks


Shifts to Relationships


Fig. 1. Major shifts in the global supply chain relative to prior models of trust.


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


195






functions, and have sought to outsource business processes that once
resided within their companies (Ivens et al., 2009). Outsourcing dra-
matically changed the nature of buyer-seller relationships, and the role
of procurement as the primary business function responsible for
managing third party suppliers increased both in scope and importance
(Monczka et al., 2018). The practice of servitization emerged as ana-
lytical capabilities are now considered a part of product offerings, re-
quiring organizations to partner with new providers of “analytics as a
service”, who must become integrated into their value chains. In ad-
dition, industrial marketers are awakening to the fact that they are
dealing with a much more powerful procurement function, that is more
centralized, reports directly to the Chief Financial Officer, and has a
mandate to drive total cost savings (Handfield, Choi, & Jeong, 2019;
Monczka et al., 2016). As the outsourcing of product development ac-
companied a shift of contract manufacturing to Asia, we witnessed the
emergence of “original design manufacturers” who became responsible
for both designing and manufacturing goods and services (Handfield
et al., 1999; Peterson, Handfield, & Ragatz, 2005). More companies in
industries such as automotive, electronics, life sciences and apparel
now rely on overseas suppliers as the primary source of new product
development and innovation (Cousins, Lawson, Handfield, & Peterson,
2009). Many are now also relying on digital providers to supplement
their supply chain capabilities and product offerings. (An excellent
example is the entry of Google and other parties developing automated
vehicle technology in Detroit). Yet much of the research on buyer-seller
relationships assumes reliance on established models of supplier-led
innovation, that may not apply in this new context.


To explore the shift in buyer-seller relationships in light of these
issues, I begin by revisiting the components of the relationship model
that was explored in our paper published in Industrial Marketing
Management in 2002, and consider them in light of the three shifts
identified here: 1) digital transformation and the rise of big data ana-
lytics, 2) the shift in governance models within the procurement
function in industry, and 3) outsourcing of product innovation and
production capabilities to global suppliers, In reviewing these shifts I
will highlight prior research in industrial marketing, and augment these
findings in light of recent industry interviews conducted at an executive
roundtable in 2017.


2. Handfield and Bechtel (2002): revisiting the ties that bind in
industrial buyer-seller relationships


In an effort to better understand this issue, North Carolina State
University's Supply Chain Resource Cooperative held a one-day ex-
ecutive summit, to discuss these issues in an open forum. We invited
eight procurement executives from oil and gas, electronics, business
services, industrial manufacturing, chemicals, and healthcare in-
dustries, and brought them in to meet with five sales executives from a
large third-party logistics provider. In this forum, we asked executives
to respond to several gaps identified between sales and procurement
executives that typically occur, and transcribed all of the comments
made in the ensuing debates and discussions that occurred. These notes
were coded and incorporated into the exploration of issues and pre-
dictions proposed in this paper. Both groups shared their internal tools
and mindsets around customer/supplier relationships, key issues that
define strategic relationships, the effective use of performance mea-
surement, and the types of disagreements that occur around contract
negotiations. The outcomes provide a compelling picture of the great
misunderstandings and myths that often exist in both sales executives
and procurement executives as they approach one another, and served
as the catalyst for this paper.


Our work in 2002 noted that buyers and sellers are indeed bound by
a number of different factors that constituted the “ties” that bind in-
dustrial relationships. After 30 years of teaching, research, and con-
sulting in the field of supply chain, I still believe these three elements
are the foundation of buyer-seller relationships. In Fig. 1, I have shown


the three foundational components explored in the Handfield and
Bechtel (2002) publication in IMM. In general, we proposed that a tight
relationship exists between buyers and sellers, that are defined by in-
vestments in human and site-specific assets, contractual engagements,
and trust. These three components form the glue that binds relation-
ships, producing value in the form of increased responsiveness. As
noted in the introduction, these concepts are still very much in play in
today's global environment. However, with the shifts in globalization,
technology, and the changing nature of buyer-seller relationships, we
believe it is also high time that these relationships be explored in a new
context. What has changed? In short, we introduce the primary per-
formance parameter emerging in the new ecosystem is velocity, and
propose how this measure creates the need for different modes of re-
lationship management among buyers and sellers:


• Real-time analytics define the relationship between trust and asset
performance


• Multi-stakeholder governance models supported by analytics are
used to establish trust, with “smart” contracts also supporting this
linkage


• Shared innovation risks must be assessed to manage asset mobili-
zation and intellectual property contractual guidelines, as relation-
ships will be key to success in this medium.


3. Velocity as the new performance outcome measure


In our 2002 article, we noted that “responsiveness” was a key out-
come measure sought from closer buyer-seller relationships. In today's
rapidly shifting environment, we propose that a similar measure,
Velocity, is a better descriptor for the benefits of improved relation-
ships, as it refers to multiple attributes of the B2B relationship
(Handfield & Linton, 2017). From a financial perspective, velocity is the
ability of an organization to flow working capital rapidly from suppliers
through to end customers, and to generate free cash flow. Working
capital generally takes the form of inventory, an asset that doesn't
produce any revenue or cash. Thus, a key benefit of faster decision-
making is the ability to hold less inventory, and generate more free
cash. Supply chains that operate in “real-time” decision-making mode
use velocity capabilities in multiple ways that impact business pro-
cesses, which goes beyond generating greater free cash flow (Handfield
& Linton, 2017). Real-time data in the supply chain produces faster
management responses in:


• Determining the volume and mix of product to schedule for delivery;
• Scheduling incoming material and communicating with suppliers;
• Updating forecasts of products that customers want
• Establishing the time and modes of efficient, responsive transpor-
tation providers,


• Planning and scheduling personnel in distribution and warehouse
operations,


• Establishing how to move product through global logistics systems
more efficiently and using which modes;


• Scaling up production of new products quickly that are “hot” in the
market;


• Communicating instantaneously with personnel who must make
decisions related to unexpected events and disruptions that impact
material flow in all roles across the supply chain (suppliers, dis-
tributors, customers).


The ability to respond to real-time data and derive supply chain
performance improvements is closely linked to prior work in organi-
zational information processing theory (OIPT). According to OIPT, an
organization's information processing capabilities must be aligned with
its information needs. That is, an organization must be able to gather,
interpret, synthesise, and coordinate information across the organiza-
tion (Burns & Wholey, 1993). Processing information in such a


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


196






structured and logical way reduces uncertainty and helps various de-
cision makers develop a shared interpretation of the information (Daft
& Lengel, 1986). This in turn can lead to faster decision-making.


The move towards providing data to others in the supply chain is an
important component of the research on servitization, a business model
innovation is the product of a servitization strategy, where a manu-
facturing firm with a product business model expands its offering into
services related to its products and, as a result, shifts from the “product-
only” business model to the “service-oriented”model (Cusumano, Kahl,
& Suarez, 2014). This is related to the concept of emerging define
“business models” (Amit & Zott, 2012), defined as a system of inter-
connected and interdependent activities that determines the way the
company “does business” with its customers, partners, and vendors.
Servitization has received growing attention within the innovation
community over the recent years (Blindenbach-Driessen & Van den
Ende, 2014; Ostrom et al., 2010). While often heralded as a move that
creates value for the customer, there are many performance implica-
tions of the business model changes that underpin servitization (Fang,
Palmatier, & Steenkamp, 2008; Martinez, Bastl, Kingston, & Evans,
2010; Suarez, Cusumano, & Kahl, 2013). Real-time visibility in supply
chains is an important part of the service model being required to do
business in the new ecosystem. Technology is spawning networked
business models, including the demand-based view wherein companies
employ various platform-systems to create value by saving time, effort,
and/or investments in learning for their customers, thereby generating
“economies of scope in use” (Ye, Priem, & Alshwer, 2012). However, as
noted by Visnjic, Weingarten, and Neely (2016), the performance im-
pact of servitization is not yet well-defined. This was stated succinctly
by a senior executive in our workshop from a global third-party logistics
provider, “After we invest all this capital in real-time data, customers
then expect to receive it for free. There is no good ROI measure of how
much market share we capture, it is simply now a part of being in
business!”


The opposite of visibility is opaqueness, or the absence of visibility
on what is happening in an organization's upstream and downstream
networks. When individuals have visibility to events that enable deci-
sion-making velocity, minor problems and disruptions are resolved
more quickly and easily before they escalate into bigger problems
(Craighead, Blackhurst, Rungtusanatham, & Handfield, 2007). Ex-
amples of visibility include demand visibility, market visibility, and
supply visibility (Chen et al., 2015; Williams, Roh, Tokar, & Swink,
2013). Speed of decision-making increases not just the flow of in-
formation, but also the flow of materials, shipments, production, and all
activities in the chain. A metaphor is that of reducing friction, which
increases flow, where friction includes all of the typical delays and
problems that slow material flows and increase inventory. Examples
include the multiple layers of approvals for purchase orders, delays in


decisions when a forecast deviation occurs, or the lack of response
when a major disruption shuts down shipments to customers. Friction
can produce bottlenecks in production systems and shipments, which
delays material and causes inventory to build up or shortages to occur
(Handfield & Linton, 2017). Examples include the Tianjin explosion, the
tsunami in Japan, and the port closure in Los Angeles.


These principles are not new. Many of the concepts around ‘lean
production systems’ and JIT have emphasized flow and visibility for
decades. For instance, Li, Chung, Goldsby, and Holsapple (2008)
maintain that demand information sharing and visibility enable im-
proved supply chain responsiveness, alerting executives to opportu-
nities and challenges in the extended supply chain (Dove, 2005;
Holsapple & Kiku, 2005). But the emergence of real-time information
that enables the instantaneous visibility of assets across multiple tiers in
supply chains has only been realized in the last two years (Handfield &
Linton, 2017). Real-time data is enabled by the emergence of cloud
computing and mobile devices, which creates ‘big data’ technology
platforms that process higher volumes of internal and external data
from multiple sources (Chen et al., 2015).


As buyer-seller relationships and the link to increased velocity for
decision-making across not only the internal enterprise, but the ex-
tended enterprise which includes buyers and sellers? What are the re-
lational components and inter-personal changes that must occur, to
ensure that a higher volume of real-time data has a meaningful im-
provement in performance velocity? These questions are explored and
shown in the context of our original model shown in Tables 1 and 2.


Are these shifts unique to a specific industry? The shifts identified in
the book “The LIVING Supply Chain” are taking place across a diverse
set of 12 industrial verticals, that are all being impacted by the move to
real-time supply chain analytics. There is evidence to suggest that some
industries are adopting more quickly to the new demands than others.
For example, automotive, electronics, and technology are moving much
more quickly in adopting the move to analytics, whereas oil and gas,
utilities, healthcare and life sciences are traditionally much slower to
adopt the new technological shifts (Chick & Handfield, 2014).


4. Shift 1: technologies that share data through real-time analytics


In the 2002 study, we recognized the important relationship be-
tween trust and asset specificity. Specifically, we noted that trust occurs
through more frequent interaction, as well as assets invested by the
seller to the site. In our 2002 study, which is also the case today, the use
of long contractual agreements is rarely going to increase trust in a
relationship. Instead, an important proxy for creation of trust in the
new management environment is the sharing of real-time analytics,
using data as the new asset. Technology has emerged to the point where
electronic communication can now occur in real-time, and also through


Table 1
Translating Handfield and Bechtel (2002) in light of real-time shifts.


Hypotheses Empirical
relationship


SHIFT: technologies and real-time analytics Predictions /possible impacts


Buyer Dependence→ Formal contracts,
trust
Responsiveness


+*
n.s.
-**


• Real-time data requires joint technology
investments and contractual commitments


• Creation of meaningful analytics requires alignment
and trust


Formal contracts → trust n.s. • Emergence of block chains and smart contracts
linking events to contract contingencies


• Block chains become an enabler for trust and role of
smart contracts may increase


Site specific assets → trust
Human assets


+*
+**


• Outsourcing has reduced interpersonal
collaboration


• Real-time analytics allow all parties to see
what is happening


• Buyer-seller relationship outcomes become more
visible


• Analytics has potential to increase communication and
trust


Human assets→ trust
Responsiveness


n.s.
n.s.


• AI, natural language processing, and big data
can be quantified to speed up human decisions


• Managers will require skills in interpreting and
deriving meaning from data along with their supply
chain partners


Trust → responsiveness +** • Real-time visibility of events allows increased
responsiveness


• Real-time visibility requires trust to build shared data
platforms and governance mechanisms


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


197






multiple channels, including social media, internet of things, and in the
future, block chains and smart contracts. Each of these developments
will have profound effects on how data is exchanged, which allows
greater visibility, and in turn, creates greater trust as both parties are
aware of how the other is responding to shifts in the supply chain
ecosystem. The emergence of real-time analytics will have profound
and unknown impacts on buyer-seller relationships, as the ability to see
what is happening in real time will change the dynamics of inter-firm
relationships, as shown in Table 1.


4.1. Buyer dependence


Blind trust is no longer something that organizations function with,
and although the internet has expanded the number of suppliers that
buyers can work with, embedded analytics and real-time data can act to
improve tighter relationships between buyers and sellers. As organi-
zational analytics have become more mainstream, managers are now
relying much more on real-time performance analytics to monitor
supply chain performance. Sales personnel may also conduct quarterly
business reviews with their clients, but must be prepared to deal with
the fact that stakeholders will not want to wait to be informed of per-
formance (Krause, Handfield, & Tyler, 2007). In fact, a recent executive
noted that managers want to “push a button to see performance”, and
aren't willing to wait until the end of the quarter. Buyers and sellers will
need to think about how to create inter-organizational performance
analytics on-demand.


4.2. Contracts


Although the relationship between contracts and trust was not sig-
nificant in our prior study, we may yet see a day when block chains,
connected through an Internet of Things sensing system, may be tied to
“smart contracts” that link specific events to contractual requirements
(Handfield & Linton, 2017).


4.3. Site-specific and human-specific assets


Our prior study found that site-specific assets and human assets
were important predictors of trust and responsiveness in relationships
(Handfield & Bechtel, 2002; Krause et al., 2007). As organizations roll-
out real-time analytics, real-time data on current inventory levels, de-
mand forecasts, price shifts, and actual order data can facilitate tighter
communication links between buyers and sellers, and over time, em-
bedded analytics can help to also drive the longevity of the relationship.
This may help to avoid having to re-bid the contract every three years
or at its termination, as the business case for renewal can be generated


if the performance is tracked over time. The capability to create a real-
time supply chain agility relies on the aligned combination of data
visibility, effective data integration and reporting, information sharing
and collaborative processes (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2001; Schoenherr &
Swink, 2012). Material velocity benefits accrue through ‘real-time data
visibility’, defined as the relative transparency of events, material, and
flows to all key decision-makers in the extended supply chain. This
definition also extends the requirement that real-time data must be of
‘high quality’, meaning it is accurate, timely, complete, and in usable
forms (Williams et al., 2013). Achieving a high level of real-time visi-
bility requires the acquisition of multiple types of high quality supply
chain information, which can be classified as either market-level or
partner-level information types (Chen et al., 2015). The ability of an
organization to derive reliable information about demand and supply
conditions allows decision-makers to mitigate uncertainty and antici-
pate change, enabling improved responsiveness (Reichhart & Holweg,
2007). But this in turn assumes that individuals can ‘trust’ the data,
which is a function of the supply chain's data quality (Pierce, Yonke, &
Ahmed, 2016).


4.4. Trust and responsiveness


A prior study found an important linkage between trust and re-
sponsiveness. In the current environment, we propose that real-time
visibility may help create a basis for trust, but will not completely re-
place the importance of “face to face” quarterly business reviews
(QBR's) between buyers and sellers. Procurement executives who par-
ticipated in our roundtable event emphasized that they believe QBR's
are an important part of the buyer-seller relationship, and believe that
procurement should lead the team, set up the timing of these reviews,
invite the key participants, and follow-up on the outcomes of the re-
views. As such, it is important that key business stakeholders from the
customer participate, and that the business development lead for the
relationship also be involved. Typically, customer business re-
presentatives will be involved in scoring the evaluations for Cost,
Service, Quality/Safety, Innovation, and Contract Compliance. Data
collection to “feed” the scorecard may be collected through operational
systems outputs, internal satisfaction surveys, external performance
metrics, or other analytics sources. The extent to which the business
stakeholder is involved in QBR's is a function of how mature the pro-
curement organization is, and reflects the extent to which the right
people are engaged and attending.


4.5. Dependence and data


In our prior study, we found that buyer dependence led to increased


Table 2
Translating Handfield and Bechtel (2002) in context of stakeholder shifts.


Hypotheses Empirical
relationship


SHIFT: multi-stakeholder relationships Predictions/possible impacts


Buyer dependence → formal
contracts,
Trust
Responsiveness


+*
n.s.
-**


• Sellers are interested in working with
“customers of choice”


• Buyers are relying more on centralized
procurement teams


• Multi-stakeholder performance reviews will become
more important


• Decision-making will rely on a broader set of metrics
Formal contracts → trust n.s. • Supplier scorecards will be used to assess


information in quarterly reviews
• Supplier scorecards will reflect real-time outcomes
• Performance outcomes will be linked to contract


contingencies electronically
Site specific assets → trust


Human assets
+*
+**


• Supply base segmentation will define supplier
roles


• Buyers moving towards local suppliers in a
global market


• Sellers will need to manage multiple stakeholder needs
• Centralized and decentralized governance will be needed


Human assets→ trust
Responsiveness


n.s.
n.s.


• Shifting roles of procurement and sales in
different stages of the relationships


• Sales will need to adjust their approach based on the
internal dynamics of buyers organization


Trust → responsiveness +** • Trust remains the glue of relationships
• Partners must also establish aligned metrics that


drive mutual value


• Sellers have an opportunity to leverage their data to
embed customer relationships


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


198






use of contracts, trust, and responsiveness. In an emerging digital en-
vironment, we believe that dependence is also a factor, in that sellers
can offer access to real-time analytics as a component of the relation-
ship, offering access to data across multiple-stakeholders, not just the
business owner or the procurement manager. In this discussion, it is
important to differentiate between real-time information technology,
and real-time visibility. The difference lies in the degree of control over
the information, and the extent to which the enterprise allows multiple
tiers of individuals in the supply chain to view and react to real-time
data. An organization may invest in real-time technology, but exert
tight control over its dispersion. In fact, many organizations have in-
vested in very tightly controlled systems called ‘control towers’
(Handfield & Linton, 2017) that restrict access to real-time data. In a
control tower, information from all of an organization's logistics sys-
tems, production facilities, inbound shipments, outbound shipments,
and inventory levels are dumped into a massive data warehouse (Bentz,
2014). The information is then centralized into a ‘control tower’, where
individuals are scanning unfolding events, and senior executives render
decisions, sometimes aided by complicated algorithms and automated
ordering systems.


The fundamental assumption behind control towers is that senior
executives removed from the day-to-day have the best knowledge of
how to optimize the entire supply chain, because they are the only ones
who have access to all of the data. Much of the data is ‘integrated’ (e.g.,
lumped together) from ERP systems, transportation management sys-
tems (TMS's), warehouse management systems (WMS's), distribution
requirement systems (DRPs) and material requirement planning sys-
tems (MRP's). Because many of these systems are in a ‘batch mode’,
meaning they are updated on a weekly, or perhaps daily basis, the in-
formation being viewed in the control tower is always lagging. As a
result, decision-makers in the control tower are making decisions based
on what happened a few days ago, and are determining what to do next
based on what they think will happen next. Some may refer to this as
‘real-time visibility’, but it is not, as it is limited by the capability of the
systems to generate data as events occur.


The importance of data as a critical asset, and the ownership of data,
will become a central point on which buyer-seller relationships will be
constructed. In an outsourced world, sellers will often be the ones
managing the customers performance data, including demand in-
formation, customer preferences, forecasts, unmet needs, inventory
velocity, and a host of other data. These data can eventually become the
basis for new analytic products, that may be sold as a service to cus-
tomers, and which also can become a vehicle to cement and sustain
long-term relationships between buyers and sellers. Indeed, I believe
that analytics generated from prior transactions will also yield im-
portant performance metrics, that may be tied to “smart contracts”, and
which are viewed and managed in real-time. Thresholds on perfor-
mance may be established, whereby quarterly review meetings may not
be necessary, facilitated instead by real-time data views. Sales teams
will not have to set about preparing a set of powerpoint presentations
summarizing key data outcomes based on the last quarters' perfor-
mance. Instead, real-time views of performance data, coalesced from
multiple sources including Internet of Things sensors, distributed
computing, real-time feeds from diverse systems, and social media may
be integrated into singular views of customer performance.


Control-towers embody the ‘old’ themes of ‘supply chain integra-
tion’: batch processing, information updates, ‘control-tower’ thinking
where only some people see the information, and decisions requiring
signoffs by senior executives. The opposite of a control tower is a ‘data
democracy’, wherein all members of the supply chain can simulta-
neously gain access to the same information on related events. This is
particularly true for sustaining customer-supplier relationships, where
embedded analytics will become the foundation for reviewing perfor-
mance outcomes, and identifying opportunities for improved colla-
boration and innovation. Our review of the research literature reveals a
dearth of information that describes how organizations are combining


mobile computing and system-wide supply chain analytics to derive
real-time, data democracy capabilities across extended supply chain
(Handfield & Linton, 2017; Oliveira & Handfield, 2018). This phe-
nomenon is so new (e.g. Flex installed its real-time Pulse Centre in
2016) that the research literature has not yet caught up with current
events (Handfield & Linton, 2017).


An executive at a large contract manufacturer we interviewed stated
this as follows:


“Real time supply chains are the anti-control tower. ‘Think about
visibility in the context of driving your car. If you are watching your
speedometer, you don't want information on your vehicle's velocity
from a week ago, an hour ago, or even a minute ago! You want to
know how fast you are moving right now!’ The same principle ap-
plies to the supply chain. To make informed decisions based on in-
sight pulled from data, we need the data to be as fresh and as current
as possible!”


As one looks to the future, the value of Big Data, and the ability to
control dimensions of the end to end supply chain, its structure, and
future business models in demand-supply systems will radically change.
Whoever controls buyer-seller data may have the greatest influence on
the structure of business models in the demand-supply systems (eco-
systems), including the impact on current roles, power positions, value-
creation, and value capture. A good example of such a power play is by
large third-party logistics providers, who are moving to become “Fourth
party logistics providers”, also called a “Lead Logistics Provider”, sug-
gesting that they would be capable of capturing and managing data
from multiple providers, and able to provide a single integrating me-
chanism to manage all entities on behalf of the primary customer.
Current shifts in technology, macroeconomic trends, increased opera-
tional constraints crossing borders, and customer-driven service has
inspired some companies to create supply chain innovation divisions,
tasked with helping to identify approaches to the evolution of supply
chain outsourcing. All parties recognize that central focus of being an
LLP is on managing big data in real time to produce actionable analy-
tics. For instance, a recent study conducted by several academics and
consultants in Germany of Fourth Party Logistics Provider services
(Schramm, Czaja, Dittrich, & Mentschel, 2019) reveals several im-
portant trends, based on a panel of experts and an online questionnaire.
The results suggest that:


• Current 4PL solutions focus on transport management and 3PL se-
lection, focusing on service audits, customs management, and en-
suring that logistics operations run smoothly.


• There is no “standard” 4PL service offering except for basic trans-
port and logistics management services. Future 4PL services will be
specifically targeted at the client's needs with different degrees of
responsibility given to 4PL's.


• There is a move towards 4PL's providing an IT platform as part of
their service. It doesn't appear to matter if the 4PL establishes and
hosts the platform, or sources it from an external IT Provider and
supervises operations.


• The most important function of 4PL's will be managing internal
integration and end to end solutions. Such integration is the key
foundation for providing further 4PL services related to data ana-
lysis.


• Value-added analytics services will be important in addition to
monitoring activities.


• Partnerships between 4PL's and their clients are transferring from
operational to closer strategic relationships. Managing a partnership
through trust and transparency will be critical.


• A clear predictor of 4PL provider success is their ability to adapt
digital technologies and transfer the advantages to their client's
business.


As more organizations recognize that logistics is not their strong


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


199






suit, they will be seeking reliable, trustworthy partners that can operate
their logistics network for them. They will expect a strong suite of IT
capabilities to be provided, even if these are not yet developed or
available in the market. These types of engagements, however, have the
potential to create game-changing capabilities in the market if effec-
tively tied to client's business strategy and objectives. In light of these
insights, we offer the following proposition that seems to suggest a shift
that may occur through the emergence of digitization and real-time
technologies:


Proposition 1. Emergence of real-time digital analytics will produce
supply chain services that will manage end to end integration, to drive
improved understanding of events in the supply chain, and drive
greater collaborative behaviour across multiple tiers in the ecosystem.
In such relationships, trust will be important, but may involve multiple
buyers and sellers from different stages of the supply chain, not just a
single link.


Because of the novelty of real-time supply chain technology, re-
search has yet to provide evidence on who will set the standards for
sharing data across multiple tiers. We found few empirical studies
supporting the application of real-time data in improving supply chain
outcomes to date. Current research on real-time supply chains hint at
the emerging capabilities of being able to access large pools of ‘big data’
(Chen et al., 2015; Gandomi & Murtaza, 2015; Geisler, Quix, Weber, &
Jarke, 2016) supply chain analytics (Acito & Khatri, 2014; Chen, Roger,
Chiang, & Storey, 2012), and the application of real-time data in control
tower settings (Bentz, 2014). Future research is needed to better un-
derstand how technologies will shift behaviors in buyer-seller re-
lationships. The digital era will also create another shift: the move to-
wards multiple stakeholders, not only within bi-lateral relationships,
but across multiple organizations.


5. Shift 2: buyer-seller relationships are owned by multiple
stakeholders


The relationship between sales and procurement has always been a
contentious one, and since 2002, the introduction of greater competi-
tion and transparency through the Internet has made this even more
competitive. Coupled with the emphasis on greater global competition,
the relationship between buyers and sellers may often be considered
under greater pressure and tension. The issue at the core of this tension
is the concept of value recognition.


The ‘cross-functional management of buyer-supplier relationships’
has been evolving since the JIT and multi-tier supplier movement from
the 1990's and has been driven further by the emergence of enabling
technologies (flexible manufacturing, internet enabled interfaces, etc.)
and economic pressure (Monczka, Handfield, Giunipero, & Patterson,
2018; Rinehart et al., 2003). The latter relates to the increasing com-
plexity and systemic character of the end offerings (product & service
packages) leading to increased cost, which drives increased supplier
collaboration and to entire systems outsourcing (Ahuja, 2000; Chen,
Paulraj, & Lado, 2004). This long-term evolution has resulted in new
forms of ecosystems, including the emergence of OEMs and special
service providers. The latter changes have been driving our third pro-
posed shift (supplier engagement in new product development) for over
two-decades especially in the electronics and automotive fields. In fact,
contract manufacturing organizations have evolved to become “original
design manufacturers”, where the design, commercialization, and pro-
duction of new products is outsourced entirely to a third party. At some
of these contract manufacturers, the customer selling the product will
have their brand on it, but may never touch or design the product at all
(Handfield & Linton, 2017).


The nature of increased cross-functional decision-making has been
researched extensively in the marketing literature. The original work by
Webster and Wind (1972) and Sheth (1973) presented a general model
for understanding organizational buying behavior, which led to


hundreds of conceptual and empirical articles. The authors identified
the buying cycle, as well as the situational influences that would occur
in this cycle, including issues such as physical, political, economic,
suppliers, technological, legal, cultural, global, group characteristics,
and informational characteristics. Role stress and role conflict were also
identified as important later (Vyas & Woodside, 1984). Later work by
Campbell and Cunningham (1985) identified the important cross-
functional roles, including specifiers, buyers, users, sanctioners, and
gatekeepers. It is interesting that in current industrial selling models,
however, we observed in our workshop that marketers displayed a
singular lack of understanding about how purchasing made its decisions
in a centralized model, whilst purchasing were also often unaware of
how sellers employed pipeline management and selling models to target
decision-makers. This is not inconsistent with Campbell and Cunning-
ham's observation that resources are often deployed in relation to the
economic importance of customers, and interpersonal relationships, but
seem to ignore the impact of the governance, and context of purchasing
decision-making in the focal firm. For example, one seller noted that “I
had no idea that purchasing is segmenting us in this way.” And a pur-
chasing manager observed that “I had no idea that marketing would not
respond to every RFP we put out there.”


5.1. Buyer dependence


The movement towards tighter integration in supply chains will
likely increase the dependence of buyers on suppliers, which will make
management of these relationships more complicated for sellers in a
multi-stakeholder world. No longer is it acceptable to only work with
the local business representative, and the roles identified in the early
work by Campbell and Cunningham and others has changed sig-
nificantly. The new face of procurement recognizes a new set of value
drivers that go beyond cost savings: understanding internal customer
requirements, and codifying these requirements into a coherent state-
ment of need that can be understood by the external supply market
(Handfield et al., 2015; Chick & Handfield, 2014). A framework known
as “congruent capability” was introduced by Handfield et al. (2015) as it
enables procurement to link internal and external stakeholders that are
mutually dependent on one another, imposing a buyer-centric rather
than a seller-centric perspective of the relationship. Congruent cap-
ability is what an executive we interviewed was referring to when he
identified the ideal of creating a ‘virtual integrated company’ where “…
the existence of suppliers is an explicit outcome of a strategic decision
to buy versus make. Implicit in this decision is the question of whether
an organization is willing to manage the standards, discipline, execu-
tion, fixed capital investments, etc. of the ‘make’ decision, versus the
sourcing, negotiation, contracting, and supplier signals associated with
the ‘buy’ decision.” As the primary boundary-spanning interface be-
tween the internal and external domains of the enterprise, purchasing
has an exclusive mandate to ensure congruency in performance out-
comes between the stakeholder's expectations and the suppliers re-
sulting performance.


The types of congruent contributions that procurement is capable of
providing include product innovation and technology development
(Handfield et al., 1999), knowledge sharing and new process capability
development (Dyer & Nobeoka, 2000), multi-tier supplier integration
(Choi & Yunsook, 2002), mitigation of supplier risk (Ellis, Shockley, &
Henrey, 2011), supplier performance improvement and capability
augmentation (Krause & Scannell, 2002; Krause, Scannell, & Calantone,
2000), supplier financial disruption avoidance (Wagner, Bode, &
Koznol, 2009), and sustainable supply chain improvements (Wieland &
Handfield, 2013). Supply management leaders are unanimous in their
call for an evolutionary approach to procurement transformation,
through the improved alignment of internal stakeholder requirements
with an emerging and growing global supply base (Handfield, 2013;
Monczka et al., 2018; Kotabe, Martin, & Domoto, 2003; Chen et al.,
2004). In addition, there have been significant shifts in the governance


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


200






structure for buying situations. The nature of cross-functional teams is
no longer as simple as it once was, as noted by Johnston and Lewin
(1996). In fact, procurement has moved to the use of category man-
agement teams, whereby global requirements are often specified after
significant supply market research, global stakeholder and leveraging
models, sophisticated total cost of ownership calculations, risk man-
agement practices, and shifting supplier evaluation models that account
for these changes (Cousins et al., 2009; Craighead et al., 2007; Krause
et al., 2007; Oliveira & Handfield, 2018). The nature of these decisions
is also impacted more and more by global economics, such as the
shifting nature of trade determined by tariffs imposed by the Trump
Administration in 2018–2019. Entire supply chains are being rede-
signed, based on these global economic shifts, which go beyond the
influence of interpersonal relationships.


5.2. Contract governance will become more complex


Despite the hundreds of articles discussing how buyers and sellers
are becoming more integrated ((Johnston & Lewin, 1996), our work-
shop reveals that bi-lateral arms-length relationships are still the norm,
even for sectors that are considered “strategic” and involve digital in-
novation. Sales account managers accuse procurement of being purely
price focused, and not recognizing the value of emerging digital solu-
tions. Procurement executives on the other hand complain that sales
account managers are always trying to “work around them” to com-
municate directly engineering, operations, clinicians, or other business
stakeholders. “Sales people are always trying to raise prices and ‘design
themselves in’ to our organization, without being competitively ten-
dered.” But sales people complain that procurement “does not re-
cognize the value we bring to the business, in terms of quality, service,
and reducing the total cost of ownership!” In the emerging landscape of
digital technology development, contract negotiation will become more
complex, and business models and managerial thinking need to adopt to
these conditions.


The bulk of marketing and procurement research since 2002 assume
that value-driven relationships have become the norm. A good deal of
research in procurement maintains that managers have become more
“strategic” in nature. Since the original work by Kraljic (1983) on
supplier segmentation, influential papers have included research on
supply base segmentation (Olsen & Ellram, 1997), as well as classifi-
cation of customers for industrial marketers using a variety of frame-
works (Cousins & Spekman, 2003; Krapfel, Salmond, & Spekman, 1991;
Park, Shin, Chang, & Park, 2010). On the other hand, procurement has
also recognized that they need to better understand who their suppliers
are, as this has often not been an area where sophisticated analysis has
been done. Today there is more focus on improving supply market in-
telligence (Chick and Handfield, 2016), and more effective commu-
nication of this intelligence to other parties in the firm (Handfield et al.,
2016). To some extent, an increased focus on supply base risk has
driven this need for intelligence data collection, as supplier disruptions
often have significant impacts on buying company operations (Choi &
Yunsook, 2002; Craighead et al., 2007).


Industrial marketers will need to think differently, in terms of
identifying new approaches to employ digital technologies to reduce
end to end supply chain costs for multiple upstream and downstream
partners. This is especially true when it comes to the category of in-
novation. About 20% of innovation ideas are cost related, but this level
may not be properly connected into the true sources of business value.
In addition, less than 15% of innovation ideas are ever properly re-
sourced and brought to fulfillment. This is because in most cases the
ROI is greater than 6months. A longer contract planning horizon would
undoubtedly translate into a higher proportion of cost savings ideas
being adopted and implemented. This value proposition clearly needs
to go beyond the level of procurement, and engage the business in both
service-level and cost-related performance improvement ideas. One
sales executive noted:


“We are losing value opportunities by not focusing on the total cost
of ownership outcomes of service improvement. Cost is a procurement
conversation, and sales team are often not equipped to have this con-
versation as they focus more on operational issues. We don't recognize
what different people want in terms of total cost performance and it
may be an opportunity for us to drive an important source of value.”


The implication is that sales should be educated and trained in the
application of Total Cost of Ownership (TCO), as a means to influence
both procurement and business stakeholders in their customers of the
potential savings from operational improvements. Some of the issues
associated with selling through a TCO model might include the fol-
lowing:


- How do we monetize value from supply chain performance im-
provements?


- How do we quantify in dollars the performance value we are
creating and improving on using the current state as a baseline?


- How do we aggregate such savings across our volume of product as
well as labor productivity, across multiple tiers of customers?


- How do we highlight the financial impacts on working capital, free
cash flow, inventory, and other balance sheet items that are a
function of increased velocity and access to analytics?


- What are the primary financial indicators (ROCE, free cash flow,
etc.) that drives supply chain velocity, and how are we addressing
those?


Increasing value has been shown to lead to improved customer sa-
tisfaction, commitment, and trust, which in turns leads to relationship
continuity (Ulaga & Eggert, 2006). Differentiation in business re-
lationships is a key component of value (Ulaga & Eggert, 2006), but in
the context of the digital transformation of the economy, new forms of
differentiation will become important. Buyers will need to establish
increasing physical and digital linkages with their suppliers, that ensure
they can maintain an essential position in the supply chain network.
This may mean that suppliers too will need to segment their customers,
and target those with whom they need to target and segment their asset
investments around. Complex partnering targeted at generating in-
novative new digital system solutions through a joint value creation
process will be different than before. These projects are often future
oriented, and there is no market for a priori assessment of the economic
value of the inputs of any supplier (Möller & Svahn, 2006; Möller &
Törrönen, 2003).


We propose that the following characteristics will need to be con-
sidered in targeting industrial marketer's effort to focus on certain
suppliers.


• Account Size – Ideally, larger accounts will provide increased op-
portunities for digital integration and growth. Note that the size of
the account may not all currently be under a single provider, but
should consider the potential for consolidation of multiple compo-
nents of the network (transportation, warehouse, brokering, in-
bound/outbound, etc.) that would benefit from a single integrated
provider solution.


• Account Complexity – Digital integration is ideally suited for a
large network, which is often globally spread out, and which pre-
sents opportunities for consolidation, global solution partnerships,
and brokering solutions.


• Key Performance Attributes – Target customers will understand
the value of a Total Cost of Ownership solution that presents itself as
an opportunity to optimize across the network, not just within the
four walls of the distribution center or warehouse. Customers will
understand the goal of reducing working capital and maximizing
free cashflow. Some customers may also have high capital intensity
operations (e.g. semiconductors, capacitated manufacturing opera-
tions requiring maintenance, specialized FDA compliance require-
ments, etc.) and understand the value of keeping equipment and


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


201






facilities up and running, rather than a low-cost solution which
slows down valuable capital operations.


• Maturity/Influence of Customer Procurement/SCM – It is not
evident that business stakeholders are not the key decision-makers
in many organizations, so business development will need to con-
sider the role of procurement/SCM. Even in decentralized busi-
nesses, procurement may lead category management teams that
may have a high level of influence on the decision. It is important
for business development executives to understand changes in se-
nior leadership in procurement, along two dimensions. First, is
procurement likely to understand the importance of adopting a
Total Cost approach to awarding the business? In other words, is this
a mature procurement function that is not simply going to run an
RFQ and award the business to the lowest cost provider on a per unit
basis? Second, does procurement have a strong or weak influence on
the business? Ideally, procurement would have a strong basis for
awarding the business based on both a high understanding of the
total cost, and a high degree of influence on the decision. In such
circumstances, the supplier is more likely to be successful.


• Relationship Characteristics – Targeted customers will have a
strong relationship with the supplier, extending several years into
the past. Trust is an important component of success in targeting
customers, as there are already many barriers that exist in the minds
of customers relative to the feasibility of the approach discussed
here (Möller & Törrönen, 2003). Because many of these shifts are so
new, suppliers will need to pilot with customers who are willing to
take on a higher level of risk with this new concept, and be willing
to explore how to operate with them in this new mode of business.


• Analytics Potential – Establishing “Analytics As a Service” implies
that analytical capabilities will need to be extended beyond the
traditional service-level KPI's associated with third party out-
sourcing operations. In addition to prescriptive capabilities opera-
tions that may increase efficiency, analytics will need to be devel-
oped that provide tangible opportunities for improving end to end
network performance. This in turn will require buy-in from the
customer.


Many of these issues can be addressed by establishing the proper
agenda for Quarterly Business Reviews (QBR's) ahead of time. The
agenda should span an overall business view, but also address perfor-
mance and cost. An “ideal” agenda that was highlighted by a pro-
curement executive at our meeting was described below.


“At _____, we only hold QBR's with our top 20 suppliers. Below the
top 20, there was a six month or annual review held with suppliers. But
the format of the meeting with the top 20 wad the same every time, and
we had a timekeeper to ensure that we didn't go past the two hour
meeting timeframe for each QBR.


- State of the Union – what is happening in the business?
- Where have we been - an in-depth review of each dimension of
performance in the scorecard, and clarification of where deficiencies
are. (30min)


- What can we do better? What are the specific actions that need to be
taken to address deficiencies in the next quarter (30min)


- Where are we going and where are you taking us? What types of
innovation and suggestions can we consider to drive not only sav-
ings but improved performance? This might include topics such as
value analysis, value engineering, productivity improvements, etc.
(30min)


In some cases, the review of performance scorecards can produce
important insights into deficiencies and assumptions regarding perfor-
mance that are misaligned, and identify future areas for value creation
using digital innovation and technology. Data and analytics can drive
root-cause analysis, precriptive actions, and predictive modeling for
how to prepare for the quarter and year ahead.


5.3. Site specificity and human assets drive trust…But there is a limit


Our paper supports the extensive research noting that suppliers
need to dedicate limited resources to customer relationships based on
the return on these investments (Webster and Wind (1972) and Sheth
(1973)). With the unfolding of multi-tier integrated business models,
organizations will need to recognize that they cannot approach every
customer in the spirit of partnership. For instance, automotive and oil
and gas companies we met with have downsized their supply bases, but
are now questioning whether their new tier 1 suppliers have the re-
quired capabilities to manage the newly formed tier 2 suppliers. Sales
executives may need to become more aware of their position in the
supply chain, and how they impact both upstream and downstream
parties. A senior sales executive recognized this and noted that “Sales is
trained to over-sell at the expense of the buy. Buyer have to be on high
alert with sales people, as they need to be far less relationship-based,
and more value based.”


Unfortunately, it also apparent from our limited sample of buyers
and sellers in our roundtable, that both procurement and sales put one
another into a “box”, through their segmentation analysis. Procurement
uses a set of strategic segmentation tools that commonly look at a
number of criteria. Procurement will generally focus on creating cate-
gory or “market sector” strategy teams, that seek to create an overall
strategy for a given classification of spending (e.g. castings, professional
services, logistics services, insurance, etc.) The first ‘cut’ is to examine
the business impact of the overall category and the value to be derived,
in terms of importance to stakeholders and potential for savings. Next, a
“supplier preference” classification attempts to target suppliers that
deem the customer a “core” or “developmental” high potential target.
The next segmentation looks at the level of power in the relationship,
and buyers prefer to be in a position of high power to drive a re-
lationship (Cousins & Spekman, 2003; Krapfel et al., 1991; Olsen &
Ellram, 1997; Park et al., 2010). Finally, the degree to which results can
be achieved are highlighted, with difficult complex, low value oppor-
tunities receiving less priority. This “filtering” process results in less
than 1% of the supplier population within a market sector being a true
target for closer relationship meriting performance management re-
views and strategic aligned planning.


An important element to consider here is how sales goes about
understanding the decision-maker in the procurement relationship. A
senior procurement executive from the electronics industry noted that:


In some cases, procurement does a purposeful job of clouding who
the decision-maker is and how that decision is made. Procurement
may emphasize that sales is forbidden from contacting anyone else
in the organization. It is not uncommon for the RFP language to
include this stipulation, with a specific list of contact people. This
language exists not to prevent sales from speaking to decision-ma-
kers, but to ensure that procurement provides a fair and balanced
view of the proposal to everyone in the organization. World-class
procurement seeks to create transparency of a sales value proposi-
tion, and wants to promote the supplier's position to everyone in a
balanced manner.


Another executive, a healthcare procurement professional, also
emphasized the importance of internal stakeholder engagement.


Sales may not be able to create the right relationship with the de-
cision-maker to the deal. No procurement team worth its salt be-
lieves that a supplier needs to lose money to get their business. In
fact, procurement is more of a facilitator, and can actually help you
to sell your offering inside the business to multiple stakeholders.
And I can do it faster than you can without my help. In healthcare,
physicians often have decision-rights on the clinical decision, so
sales used to go to them directly and forced procurement to buy it.
Today we are implementing clinical category teams led by physi-
cians that will sell across multiple hospitals, so you aren't selling it


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


202






to one physician at a time. Now we can pull it through, rather than
going behind our backs and upsetting a lot of people.


Sales organizations are thus beginning to apply opportunity risk
assessments, to consider whether they have a high likelihood of making
the sale. This insight was very surprising to the procurement executives
in the room. Only a few could comprehend the fact that sales personnel
do NOT pursue every opportunity (RFQ) that came their way! There are
four primary reasons why customer pursuits are halted in their tracks.


1. Limited access to the decision maker – if sales does not have an
opportunity to present to the decision-maker, then they won't pro-
ceed. If a sales manager has the opportunity to make a presentation
to the decision-maker (whether it is at the corporate or local level),
they are almost always going to succeed. An important issue here,
however, is the need to understand WHO the decision-maker is. The
internal procurement-stakeholder relationship is therefore critical to
understand by sales at this stage, and will thus strongly influence the
outcome of the pursuit. Experienced executives note that if there are
three coaches (influencers on the decision-maker) that you can
speak to, than you have a good chance of success to influence the
process.


2. Lack of existing relationship. This is often known as a “cold” re-
lationship. If there is no pre-existing relationship with a customer,
and no prior engagement, the odds of success are also very low. This
means that an entire education process has to occur. Also, it is im-
portant to recognize the cost of change that the customer will need
to go through, and evaluating whether the benefits provided by a
potential change in sourcing strategy will outweigh the costs of
doing so. Procurement may not even understand the value propo-
sition, and are using the supplier as a “check in the box” to get a
third quote to their RFP, in the hopes of putting more cost pressure
on the incumbent supplier!


3. If the potential customer has never outsourced before, they are
unlikely to understand the value proposition of a third-party logis-
tics provider. If the decision-maker does not recognize the value
statement, and doesn't understand the value provided, there is a low
chance of success.


4. If the environment involves a strong incumbent, it is going to be
unlikely that you will displace them. If a business development
manager goes into a situation where there are multiple other sup-
pliers in the running, then they are likely going to be viewed as a
“commodity” by the customer, and there is a low likelihood of
success.


In all four of these cases, however, there is an education process that
must occur, and an opportunity for sales to help procurement under-
stand the nature of the business decision they have to make. The sales
team needs to offer a process and business model that presents an op-
portunity that will cover the cost of change. Is there enough value on
the cost of change on their side? An important differentiating feature
will be the analytics around total cost of ownership, as well as uplift on
the revenue side. If there is no access to data to make these analytical
insights, then the sales opportunity is simply not present. On the other
hand, if procurement can be convinced of the business case, they will
sell the idea up the chain of command.


These insights lead us to our second research proposition:


Proposition 2. Governance over buyer-seller relationships will become
more complex in the presence of digital technologies, and sellers will
need to differentiate their value through digital technologies to
establish their location in the supply chain network. In such cases,
the outcome will result in a stronger and more embedded position in
the network as digital services become part of doing business in
organizational relationships.


This proposition recognizes that working with multiple stakeholders


will make the job of selling more challenging, as there is no long a
single decision-maker. However, the end result, although it may take
longer to achieve, will result in an aligned scorecard that can be em-
ployed to capture multiple stakeholder needs in the relationship.
Understanding the decision-maker in the process is clearly an area that
requires an in-depth assessment, as this can heavily influence the nature
of whether to pursue the customer. In the past, sales would rely on
internal relationships with the CEO or COO, who was the presumed
decision-maker. As procurement organizations have matured and come
into their own, sales reliance on C-suite relationships can occur at their
own risk. In one healthcare provider, a supplier went to the CEO when
turned down by procurement due to performance issues, and was
promptly told that they needed to go back to procurement, who held
the decision-rights! Many sales deals in logistics services are $50M+,
and these decisions are made carefully and with a great deal of due
diligence. There is often a ‘tactical” element to the procurement pro-
cess, especially with the advent of RFQ tools such as those in pro-
curement systems such as SAP. These processes often result in im-
personal interactions, and value-based relationships may be damaged in
the process.


In mature procurement organizations, there is a common and
aligned view of the supply base that is consistently communicated and
emphasized in all business transactions. An example of a typical “seg-
mentation” view of the supply base will be a tiered structure, whereby
Tier 1 suppliers are viewed as strategic partners. If you are in a tier 1,
you are viewed as a strategic resource, who acts as a trusted advisor to
deliver business value and promote organizational objectives. There are
typically only a handful of suppliers who are in this role in most or-
ganizations. Tier 2 suppliers are strategic, but do not have access to the
same regular performance reviews and in-depth senior executive en-
gagements. Tier 3 suppliers are primarily working with local business
relationships, while Tier 4 are purely transactional. In terms of logistics
providers, a Tier 4 is viewed as someone who provides labor and no
other value.


It is important for the sales organization to understand how they are
viewed by procurement in this context, as a number of assumptions on
how procurement will work with you as a sales organization will follow
from this perception. However, it is also important for the sales orga-
nization to recognize how procurement views them as well!


The final shift is related to the increased responsibilities being ac-
crued by sellers as a function of increased outsourcing.


6. Shift 3: increased reliance on partners for innovation


6.1. Innovation requires dependence


In the prior study by Handfield and Bechtel (2002), the model
predicted that buyers who feel that they are dependent on suppliers,
will likely lead to development of more formal contracts to mitigate
risk, reduced levels of trust, and generally speaking deteriorating per-
formance in supplier responsiveness. Our data suggested that more
formal contracts were indeed more likely to be used, and responsive-
ness was also likely to decline. Since this period, several changes have
led to major shifts in these proposed relationships. These changes are
shown in Table 3.


It is difficult for one firm to possess all of the resources, knowledge
and capabilities required to sustain existing technological capabilities,
while at the same time, to build new ones (Dyer & Singh, 1998; Sarkar,
Echambadi, Cavusgil, & Aulakh, 2001). Thus, sharing “breakthrough”
knowledge with their supply base provides an opportunity to enable
supply chain partners to help make sense out of ambiguous and un-
certain information about the environment.


6.2. Human Asset specificity promotes technology development


Strong in-house technological proficiency also provides an avenue


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


203






for identifying and valuing information received from the environment.
Even where the primary source of technology is external, the firm needs
strong internal capabilities to evaluate the external information and to
integrate it into internal operations (Cousins et al., 2006). However, as
previously stated, many firms are also increasingly reliant on their
suppliers to help process this information. The role of supply manage-
ment in driving improvements in product development performance
has received increasing attention (Handfield et al., 1999; Monczka,
Handfield, Frayer, Ragatz, & Scannell, 1999; Peterson et al., 2005).


6.3. Socialization breeds trust


Successful inter-organizational product development is also depen-
dent on the partner's ability to manage, maintain and create knowledge
(Cohee, Barrows, & Handfield, 2018; Cohen & Levinthal, 1990). So-
cialization between the buyer and seller will become a much more
important factor, and has been shown to impact both the absorptive
capacity of the buyer, as well as their level of innovation (Cousins et al.,
2009; Peterson et al., 2005). As innovation is often shared across firm
boundaries, the investigation of how knowledge is acquired and
transferred between buyer and supplier represents an important em-
pirical question (Ahuja, 2000; Argote, McEvily, & Reagans, 2003).
Inter-organizational product development requires more extensive co-
ordination and management than traditional intra-firm development
and presents its own set of unique difficulties; such as how to manage
appropriation concerns and establish trust with the partner company
(Bstieler, 2006; Littler, Leverick, & Bruce, 1995). In this sense, re-
lationship commitment is a key to building inter-organizational
learning agility (Carmeli, Zivan, Gomes, & Markman, 2017). Despite
these additional challenges, sharing knowledge with suppliers can often
help in problem solving, making design and cost trade-offs, improving
manufacturability and producing a higher level of quality (Takeishi,
2001).


These insights lead us to the following proposition:


Proposition 3. Increased digitization will provide competitive
opportunities for suppliers to provide digital innovation, that and
differentiate value through analytics as a service in emerging business
models, and create opportunities for multi-tier integration.


The need for direct engagement is one of the most important com-
ponents of new product development and innovation (Chowdhury,
Jayaram, & Prajogo, 2017; Monczka et al., 1999). The emerging digital
environment provides an opportunity for creating value that is un-
paralleled in the current environment. For new customers, sales per-
sonnel have an opportunity to promote digital innovation by ensuring
that they remain on the forefront of a purchasing organization's en-
vironmental scans, even if they are not a current customer. This may
involve engagement in trade shows, technical presentations, and so-
cialization mechanisms that provide a venue for procurement to learn


more about what the art of the possible may be, even if the technology
is not immediately applicable. Organizations are more interested in
identifying partners for inclusion on their technology roadmaps
(Handfield et al., 1999; Handfield et al., 2003). Cousins et al. (2009)
argue that firms who actively scan their environment for breakthrough
technologies will be more successful at integrating and disseminating
knowledge within new product development. Knowledge management
is a matter of “connecting people so they can think together”
(McDermott & O'Dell, 2001: 104). While the effectiveness of the
knowledge management process largely depends on how well a com-
pany manages its resources, assistance from supply managers in ex-
tending the reach of knowledge acquisition back into the supply base is
a critical component for success. Intellectual capital and understanding
business needs can lead to innovative digital solutions that will tie the
business with data to drive improved end to end supply chain im-
provements. As one supply manager we interviewed stated, “accessing
the knowledge in the heads of 10,000 people in the supply base to improve
your product and come up with new ideas is surely an asset worth working
for!” (Chick & Handfield, 2014).


7. Conclusions


In our prior study, we were concerned with the level to which
companies established site-specific assets ensure access and facilitate
relationships between buying and selling organizations. As more in-
dustries such as automotive, electronics, life sciences and apparel
source from low cost countries that are distant from one another, ex-
ecutives are increasingly aware of the potential risks of supply chain
disruption, as well as brand risks, that exist. As suppliers and customers
grow closer, the need to meet more often, to work through contentious
issues, has become critical in management of supply chain flows. One of
the barriers that has arisen is the increasing distance between buyers
and sellers, as outsourcing has continued to grow. This is particularly
the case as procurement has outsourced to “Low Cost Countries” in
their pursuit of lower costs.


Our updated insights on the current state of buyer-seller relation-
ships suggest that the need for personal relationships may be on the
rise. As noted in our propositions, inter-organizational relationships
will require greater engagement with multiple stakeholders, and whe-
ther these occur virtually or in-person, the personalities and relation-
ships that emerge will matter. For example, multiple teams of people
may not be reviewing data in real-time, and conducting more frequent
performance reviews. This may include multiple stakeholders, and may
complicate the governance of these relationships as different parties
need to come to a resolution on how to address different situations,
when each has a different point of view on how to achieve this. The role
of buyers will also increase, as they may require more frequent meet-
ings, particularly around new product initiatives and new product roll-
outs. All of this will require a new type of seller, one who has strong


Table 3
Handfield and Bechtel (2002) in light of shifts in product innovation.


Hypotheses Relationship Shift: shared risks and rewards in product innovation Predictions/possible impacts


Buyer dependence → Formal
contracts,
Trust
Responsiveness


+*
n.s.
-**


• Joint investment in new technologies is key
• Technology sharing and co-development leads to greater


trust


• Less reliance on contracts due to fuzzy nature of
outcomes and deliverables


• Project review frequency will become key
Formal contracts → Trust n.s. • IP and trust issues often conflict


• Trust grows as a function of interpersonal familiarity, but can
change with different personnel


• Establishing governance mechanisms to manage
information sharing will be key


Site specific assets → Trust
Human assets


+*
+**


• Outsourcing to diverse regions results in cultural
misunderstanding on NPD teams


• Local presence on NPD development teams will be
key


Human assets→ Trust
Responsiveness


n.s.
n.s.


• Outsourcing to diverse regions results in cultural
misunderstanding on NPD teams


• Local presence on NPD development teams will be
key


Trust → Responsiveness +** • Engineering in buyers are often adversely influenced to share
information with suppliers


• Defined roles and mutual expectations for parties
will become critical for success


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


204






inter-personal and relationships management skills, and who also
brings problem-solving skills to the table.


Another shift will be a new focus on the multi-enterprise supply
chain as the unit of analysis, and the emergence of “lead logistics
providers”, a concept that has heretofore remained unexplored in the
research. The emergence of a single provider with analytical insights
collected from multiple enterprises, leading to a transparent and un-
biased role, is one that is very much new to the research, and which
causes a great deal of discomfort in many parties, will need to be ad-
dress. The role of trust verified by data will become much more im-
portant in this context.


As a result of these shifts, despite the move towards digitization of
supply chains, we may start to see companies move closer together. In
fact, the emerging practice of “localization” is being driven by the re-
cent wave towards increased tariffs and protectionism. Organizations
are starting to realize they need to “buy where they sell, and sell where
they buy”, which may involve establishing local suppliers to meet local
content requirements, and avoid tariffs, customs, duties, and other fines
(Handfield & Linton, 2017). Long lead times are another characteristic
of global sources, and this often involves establishing large inventory
buffers to deal with them. In a world where speed and velocity is im-
perative, localization is starting to look a lot more appealing! The push
towards localization thus leads us to propose that buyer-seller re-
lationships may again be on the rise, (albeit spanning multiple parties),
in an era where the benefits of true globalization are under threat.


In our prior paper in 2002, there seemed to be no relationship be-
tween contracts and trust. In fact, contracts were found to somewhat
get in the way of creating trust. In the past eighteen years, we have seen
a significant improvement in the ability of organizations to create im-
proved contracts, that are able to better navigate the uncertainties that
exist. One of the most important elements is that more stakeholders are
involved in the contracting process upfront, as we identified in this
paper. We believe that in case of joint technology development, this
will also become more important, especially with the entrance of new
digital providers in the supply chain who will become embedded in the
physical supply chains. In tandem with procurement having more sta-
keholders to consider, sales should also be aware that multiple forms of
value need to be produced through analytics as a service, and explore
new contractual mechanisms for doing so.


In addressing this question, it is important for the sales team to be
able to quantify the elements of value and in this case, educate the
customer. In some cases, the procurement organization may not have a
full level of understanding regarding the different forms of performance
and value that a third party outsourced provider is can deliver to their
business. In the evolving ecosystem that is unfolding with digital
transformation, new roles for buyers and sellers will undoubtedly prove
to be a rich area for future industrial marketing research.


References


Acito, F., & Khatri, V. (2014). Business analytics: Why now and what next? Business
Horizons, 57(5), 565–570.


Ahuja, G. (2000). The duality of collaboration: Inducements and opportunities in the
formation of interfirm linkages. Strategic Management Journal, 21, 317–343.


Amit, R., & Zott, C. (2012). Creating value through business mdel innovation. Sloan
Management Review, 53(3), 41–49.


Argote, L., McEvily, B., & Reagans, R. (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations: An
integrative framework and review of emerging themes. Management Science, 49(4),
571–582.


Barratt, M., & Adegoke, O. (2007). Antecedents of supply chain visibility in retail supply
chains: A resource-based theory perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 25(6),
1217–1233.


Bentz, B. (2014). Supply chain control towers help organizations respond to new pres-
sures. Supply Chain Management Review, 18(4), 34–38 July.


Blindenbach-Driessen, F., & Van den Ende, J. (2014). The locus of innovation: The effect
of a separate innovation unit on exploration, exploitation, and ambidexterity in
manufacturing and service firms. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(5),
1089–1105.


Bstieler, L. (2006). Trust formation in collaborative new product development. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 23(1), 56–72.


Burns, L., & Wholey, D. (1993). Adoption and abandonment of matrix management
programs: Effects of organizational characteristics and Interorganizational networks.
Academy of Management Journal, 36(1), 106–138.


Campbell, N. C., & Cunningham, M. T. (1985). Managing customer relationships. The
challenge of deploying scarce managerial resources. International Journal of Research
in Marketing, 2(4), 255–262.


Carmeli, A., Zivan, I., Gomes, E., & Markman, G. (2017). Underlining micro socio-psy-
chological mechanisms of buyer-supplier relationships: Implications for inter-orga-
nizational learning agility. Human Resource Management Review. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.hrmr.2016.12.002.


Chen, D., Preston, D., & Swink, M. (2015). How the use of big data analytics affects value
creation in supply chain management. Journal of Management Information Systems,
32(4), 4–39.


Chen, H., Roger, H., Chiang, R., & Storey, V. (2012). Business intelligence and analytics:
From big data to big impact. MIS Quarterly, 36(4), 1165–1188.


Chen, I. J., Paulraj, A., & Lado, A. (2004). Strategic purchasing, supply managmeent, and
firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 22, 505–523.


Chick, G., & Handfield, R. (2014). Procurement’s value proposition. London: Kogan-Page.
Choi, T. Y., & Yunsook, H. (2002). Unveiling the structure of supply networks: Case


studies in Honda, Acura, and DaimlerChrysler. Journal of Operations Management,
20(5), 469–493.


Chowdhury, M., Jayaram, J., & Prajogo, D. (2017). The influence of socialisation and
absorptive capacity on buyer’s innovation performance. International Journal of
Production Research, 55(23), 7022–7039.


Cohee, L., Barrows, J., & Handfield, R. (2018). Early supplier integration in the U.S.
defense industry. Journal of Defense Analytics and Logistics, 3(1), 2–28. https://www.
emeraldinsight.com/eprint/HSU85JBSY7FZPMRFDD5U/full.


Cohen, J., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning
and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 128–152.


Cousins, P., Handfield, R., Lawson, B., & Peterson, K. (2006). Creating supply chain re-
lational capital: the impact of formal and informal socialization processes. special
issue of Journal of Operations Management on Behavioral Research in OM, 26, 851–864.


Cousins, P., Lawson, B., Handfield, R., & Peterson, K. (2009). Knowledge sharing in
collaborative product development: The impact of formal and informal socialization
rocesses. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 26, 156–172.


Cousins, P., & Spekman, R. (2003). Strategic supply and the management of inter- and
intra-organizational relationships. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 9(1),
19–29.


Craighead, C., Blackhurst, J., Rungtusanatham, J., & Handfield, R. (2007). The severity of
supply chain disruptions: Design characteristics and mitigation capabilities. Decision
Sciences, 38(1), 131–156.


Cusumano, M. A., Kahl, S. J., & Suarez, F. F. (2014). Services, industry evolution, and the
competitive strategies of product firms. Strategic Management Journal. https://doi.
org/10.1002/smj.2235.


Daft, R., & Lengel, R. (1986). Organizational information requirements, media richness
and structural design. Management Science, 32(5), 554–571.


Dove, R. (2005). Agile enterprise cornerstones: Knowledge, values & response ability.
Business agility and Information Technology Diffusion, 180(June), 313–330. https://doi.
org/10.1007/b135658.


Dyer, J., & Singh, H. (1998). The relational view: Cooperative strategy and sources of
interorganizational competitive advantage. The Academy of Management Review,
23(4), 229–660.


Dyer, J. H., & Nobeoka, K. (2000). Creating and managing a high-performance knowl-
edge-sharing network: The Toyota case. Strategic Management Journal, 21(3), 345.


Ellis, S. C., Shockley, J., & Henrey, R. M. (2011). Making sense of supply disruption risk
research: A conceptual framework grounded in enactment theory. Journal of Supply
Chain Management, 47(2), 65–96.


Fang, E., Palmatier, R., & Steenkamp, J. (2008). Effect of service transition strategies on
firm value. Journal of Marketing, 72(5), 1–14.


Frohlich, M. T., & Westbrook, R. (2001). Arcs of integration: An international study of
supply chain strategies. Journal of Operations Management, 19(2), 185–200.


Galbraith, J. (1974). Organization design: An information processing view. Interfaces,
4(3), 28–36.


Gandomi, A., & Murtaza, H. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and
analytics. International Journal of Information Management, 35(2), 137–144.


Geisler, S., Quix, C., Weber, S., & Jarke, M. (2016). Ontology-based data quality man-
agement for data streams. ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, 7(4), 1–34.


Gonzalez-Zapatero, C., Gonzalez-Benito, J., & Lannelongue, G. (2016). Antecedents of
functional integration during new product development: The purchasing-marketing
link. Industrial Marketing Management, 52, 47–59.


Handfield, R. (2013). The future of procurement. Research Brief, KPMG Procurement
Advisory Group. Houston: KPMG International.


Handfield, R., Choi, T., & Jeong, S. (2019). Emerging procurement technology: Data
analytics and cognitive analytics. International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-11-2017-0348.


Handfield, R., Cousins, P., Lawson, B., & Petersen, K. (2015). How can supply manage-
ment really improve performance? A knowledge-based model of alignment cap-
abilities. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 51(3), 3–17.


Handfield, R., & Linton, T. (2017). The living supply chain: The imperative of operating in
real-time. New York: Wiley.


Handfield, R., Ragatz, G., Monczka, R., & Peterson, K. (1999). Involving suppliers in new
product development. California Management Review, 42(1), 59–82.


Handfield, R., Ragatz, G., & Peterson, K. (2003). A model of supplier integration into new
product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 20(4), 284–299.


Handfield, R. B., & Bechtel, C. (2002). The role of trust and relationship structure in
improving supply chain responsiveness. Industrial Marketing Management, 31(4),


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


205



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0045

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2016.12.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2016.12.002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0080

https://www.emeraldinsight.com/eprint/HSU85JBSY7FZPMRFDD5U/full

https://www.emeraldinsight.com/eprint/HSU85JBSY7FZPMRFDD5U/full

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0105

https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2235

https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0115

https://doi.org/10.1007/b135658

https://doi.org/10.1007/b135658

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0170

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-11-2017-0348

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0200




267–382.
Holsapple, C., & Kiku, J. (2005). Exploring secondary activities of the knowledge Chain.


Knowledge and Process Management, 12(1), 3–31. https://doi.org/10.1002/kpm.219.
Ivens, V. S., Pardo, C., & Tunisini, A. (2009). Organizing and integrating marketing and


purchasing in business markets. Industrial Marketing Management, 38, 851–856.
Johnsen, T. (2018). Purchasing and supply management in an industrial marketing per-


spective. Industrial Marketing Management, 69, 91–97.
Johnston, W., & Lewin, J. (1996). Organizational buying behavior: Toward an integrative


framework. Journal of Business Research, 35(1), 1–15.
Kotabe, M., Martin, X., & Domoto, H. (2003). Gaining from vertical partnerships:


Knowledge transfer, relationship duration, and supplier performance improvement in
the U.S. and Japanese automotive industries. Strategic Management Journal, 24(4),
293–316.


Kraljic, P. (1983). Purchasing must become supply management. Harvard Business Review,
109–117 (Sept.–Oct.).


Krapfel, R., Salmond, D., & Spekman, R. (1991). A strategic approach to managing buyer-
seller relationships. European Journal of Marketing, 25(9), 22–37.


Krause, D. R., & Scannell, T. V. (2002). Supplier development practices: Product- and
service-based industry comparisons. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 38(2),
13–20.


Krause, D. R., Scannell, T. V., & Calantone, R. J. (2000). A structural analysis of the
effectiveness of buying firms’ strategies to improve supplier performance. Decision
Sciences, 31(1), 33–55.


Krause, D., Handfield, R., & Tyler, B. (2007). The relationship between supplier devel-
opment, commitment, social capital accumulation and performance improvement.
Journal of Operations Management special issue on Organization Theory and Supply Chain
Management, 25(4), 525–548.


Li, X., Chung, C., Goldsby, T., & Holsapple, C. (2008). A unified model of supply chain
agility: The work-design perspective. International Journal of Logistics Management, 19.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09574090810919224.


Lindgreen, A., Campello, A., & Angell, R. (2016). Introduction to the special issue on co-
management of purchasing and marketing. Industrial Marketing Management, 37(3),
292–300.


Littler, D., Leverick, F., & Bruce, M. (1995). Factors affecting the process of collaborative
product development: A study of UK manufacturers of information and commu-
nications technology products. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 12(1),
16–32.


Martinez, V., Bastl, M., Kingston, J., & Evans, E. (2010). Challenges in transforming
manufacturing organisations into product-service providers. Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management, 21(4), 449–469.


McDermott, R., & O’Dell, C. (2001). Overcoming cultural barriers to sharing knowledge.
Journal of Knowledge Management, 5(1), 76–85.


Möller, K., & Svahn, S. (2006). Role of knowledge in value creation in business nets.
Journal of Management Studies, 43(5), 985–1007.


Möller, K. K., & Törrönen, P. (2003). Business suppliers’ value creation potential: A
capability-based analysis. Industrial Marketing Management, 32(2), 109–118.


Monczka, R., Handfield, R., Frayer, D., Ragatz, G., & Scannell, T. (1999). New product
development: Strategies for supplier integration. Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Press.


Monczka, R., Handfield, R., Giunipero, L., & Patterson, J. (2018). Purchasing and Supply
Chain Management (7th ed.). Cincinnati, OH: Southwestern Publishing, College
Division.


Oliveira, M., & Handfield, R. (2018). Analytical foundations for development of real-time
supply chain capabilities. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1493240.


Olsen, R., & Ellram, L. (1997). A portfolio approach to supplier relationships. Industrial
Marketing Management. 26, 101–113.


Ostrom, A. L., Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., Burkhard, K. A., Goul, M., Smith-Daniels, V., ...


Rabinovich, E. (2010). Moving forward and making a difference: Research priorities
for the science of service. Journal of Service Research, 13(1), 4–36.


Park, J., Shin, K., Chang, T., & Park, J. (2010). An integrative framework for supplier
relationship management. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 110(4), 495–515.
https://doi.org/10.1108/02635571011038990.


Peterson, K., Handfield, R., & Ragatz, G. (2005). Supplier integration into new product
development: Coordinating product, process and supply chain design, special issue of
Journal of Operations Management on Product. Process Design Impacts on Supply Chain
Design, 23(4), 371–388.


Pierce, E., Yonke, L., & Ahmed, M. (2016). The state of information quality and data
governance — 2016 Industry Survey & Report. https://www.iqint.org/publication/
state-information-quality-data-governance-2016-industry-survey-report/.


Reichhart, A., & Holweg, M. (2007). Creating the customer-responsive supply chain: A
reconciliation of concepts. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 27(11), 1144–1172. https://doi.org/10.1108/01443570710830575.


Rinehart, L., Eckert, J., Handfield, R., Page, T., & Atkin, T. (2003). An assessment of
supplier-customer relationships. Journal of Business Logistics, 25(1), 25–62.


Sarkar, M., Echambadi, R., Cavusgil, T., & Aulakh, P. (2001). The influence of com-
plementarity, compatibility, and relationship capital on alliance performance.
Academy of Marketing Science, 29(4), 358–373.


Schoenherr, T., & Swink, M. (2012). Revisiting the arcs of integration: Cross-validations
and extensions. Journal of Operations Management, 30(1–2), 99–115. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jom.2011.09.001.


Schramm, H. J., Czaja, C. N. C. N., Dittrich, M., & Mentschel, M. (2019). Current ad-
vancement and future developments of fourth party logistics in the digital future.
Logistics, 3(1), 7–15. https://www.mdpi.com/2305-6290/3/1/7.


Sheth, J. (1973). A model of industrial buyer behavior. Journal of Marketing. 37, 50–56.
Suarez, F. F., Cusumano, M. A., & Kahl, S. J. (2013). Services and the business models of


product firms: An empirical analysis of the software industry. Management Science,
59(2), 420–435.


Takeishi, A. (2001). Bridging inter- and intra-firm boundaries: Management of supplier
involvement in automobile product development. Strategic Management Journal, 22,
403–433.


Toon, M. A., Morgan, R. E., Lindgreen, A., Vanhamme, J., & Hingley, M. K. (2016).
Processes and integration in the interaction of purchasing and marketing:
Considering synergy and symbiosis. Industrial Marketing Management, 52, 74–81.


Ulaga, W., & Eggert, A. (2006). Value-based differentiation in business relationships:
Gaining and sustaining key supplier status. Journal of Marketing, 70(1), 119–136.


Visnjic, I., Weingarten, F., & Neely, A. (2016). Only the brave: Product innovation, service
business model innovation, and their impact on performance. Journal of Product
Innovation Management. 33(1), 36–52.


Vyas, N., & Woodside, A. (1984). An Inductive Model of Industrial Supplier Choice
Processes. Journal of Marketing, 48, 30. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251308.


Wagner, S., Bode, C., & Koznol, P. (2009). Supplier default dependencies: Empirical
evidence from the automotive industry. European Journal of Operational Research,
198, 150–161.


Webster, F. E., & Wind, Y. (1972). Organizational buying behavior. Prentice Hall.
Wieland, A., & Handfield, R. (2013). The socially responsible supply chain: An imperative


for global corporations. Supply Chain Management Review, 17(5), 22–28 September.
Williams, B., Roh, J., Tokar, T., & Swink, M. (2013). Leveraging supply chain visibility for


responsiveness: The moderating role of internal integration. Journal of Operations
Management, 31(7–8), 543–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.09.003.


Wynstra, F., Weggeman, M., & van Weele, A. (2003). Exploring purchasing integration in
product development. Industrial Marketing Management, 32(1), 69–83.


Ye, G., Priem, R. L., & Alshwer, A. A. (2012). Achieving demand-side synergy from
strategic diversification: How combining mundane assets can leverage consumer
utilities. Organization Science, 23(1), 207–224.


R. Handfield Industrial Marketing Management 83 (2019) 194–206


206



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0200

https://doi.org/10.1002/kpm.219

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0250

https://doi.org/10.1108/09574090810919224

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0295

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1493240

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1493240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0310

https://doi.org/10.1108/02635571011038990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0320

https://www.iqint.org/publication/state-information-quality-data-governance-2016-industry-survey-report/

https://www.iqint.org/publication/state-information-quality-data-governance-2016-industry-survey-report/

https://doi.org/10.1108/01443570710830575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0340

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2011.09.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2011.09.001

https://www.mdpi.com/2305-6290/3/1/7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf2375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0375

https://doi.org/10.2307/1251308

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0390

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.09.003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0019-8501(19)30083-5/rf0405


