









 Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


2212-8271 © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Changeable, Agile, Reconfigurable & Virtual Production Conference 2016
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2016.07.040 


ScienceDirect


Changeable, Agile, Reconfigurable & Virtual Production 


A maturity model for assessing Industry 4.0 readiness and maturity of 
manufacturing enterprises 


 Andreas Schumachera,b*, Selim Erolb, Wilfried Sihna,b  
aFraunhofer Austria Research GmbH, Theresianumgasse 7, 1040 Vienna, Austria 


bVienna University of Technology, Institut of Management Science, Theresianumgasse 7, 1040 Vienna, Austria  


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +43-1-58801-33046; fax: +43-1-58801-33094; E-mail address: andreas.schumacher@fraunhofer.at 


Abstract 


Manufacturing enterprises are currently facing substantial challenges with regard to disruptive concepts such as the Internet of Things, Cyber 
Physical Systems or Cloud-based Manufacturing – also referred to as Industry 4.0. Subsequently, increasing complexity on all firm levels 
creates uncertainty about respective organizational and technological capabilities and adequate strategies to develop them. In this paper we 
propose an empirically grounded novel model and its implementation to assess the Industry 4.0 maturity of industrial enterprises in the domain 
of discrete manufacturing. Our main goal was to extend the dominating technology focus of recently developed models by including 
organizational aspects. Overall we defined 9 dimensions and assigned 62 items to them for assessing Industry 4.0 maturity. The dimensions 
“Products”, “Customers”, “Operations” and “Technology” have been created to assess the basic enablers. Additionally, the dimensions 
“Strategy”, “Leadership”, Governance, “Culture” and “People” allow for including organizational aspects into the assessment. Afterwards, the 
model has been transformed into a practical tool and tested in several companies whereby one case is presented in the paper. First validations of 
the model’s structure and content show that the model is transparent and easy to use and proved its applicability in real production 
environments. 
 
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Changeable, Agile, Reconfigurable & Virtual Production Conference. 


 Keywords: Industry 4.0; Maturity Model; Strategic Management; Change Management  


 
1. Introduction  


Manufacturing companies around the world are facing 
substantial challenges due to recent environmental, societal, 
economic and technological developments. To meet these 
challenges manufacturing companies of the future will need 
capabilities for managing their whole value-chain in an agile 
and responsive manner. Companies will need virtual and 
physical structures that allow for close cooperation and rapid 
adaption along the whole lifecycle from innovation to 
production and distribution [1].  


Current state-of-the-art in production technology can be 
described as mainly driven by increasing efficiency regarding 
manufacturing processes. However, this focus of advances in 
manufacturing efficiency takes place on the individual firm 
rather than on the whole supply chain. Advances can also be 


seen on the organizational-economic level, e.g. Lean 
Management, on the manufacturing technology level, e.g. 
Laser technology, additive manufacturing, robotics [2] on the 
material level, e.g. semi-conductors, nano materials, carbon 
fibres, thin-films, biomaterials [3], on the information 
technology level, e.g. RFID, embedded systems. All these 
advances have led to significant but isolated gains in process 
efficiency and product quality. 


Hence, for decades to come both academics and 
practitioners envision significant efficiency gains mainly 
through consequent digital integration and intelligentization 
[4] of manufacturing processes [5]. Accordingly, integration 
will need to take place on horizontal level (across all 
participants in the entire value-chain) and on vertical level 
(across all layers of automation). Fully integrated and 
networked factories, machines and products then will be able 


© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientifi c committee of the Changeable, Agile, Reconfi gurable & Virtual Production Conference 2016






162   Andreas Schumacher et al.  /  Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


to act in an intelligent and partly autonomous way that 
requires minimal manual interventions [6].  


Recent concepts such as the Internet of Things, Industrial 
Internet, Cloud-based Manufacturing [7] and Smart 
Manufacturing address these requirements in part and are 
commonly subsumed by the visionary concept of a Fourth 
Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) [8]. Industry 4.0 refers to 
recent technological advances where the internet and 
supporting technologies (e.g. embedded systems) serve as a 
backbone to integrate physical objects, human actors, 
intelligent machines, production lines and processes across 
organizational boundaries to form a new kind of intelligent, 
networked and agile value chain.  


It is obvious that such a far reaching vision will lead to an 
increased complexity of manufacturing processes on the 
micro and macro level [9]. Especially small- and medium 
sized manufacturing companies are uncertain about the 
financial effort required for the acquisition of such new 
technology and the overall impact on their business model.   


Experiences from several strategic orientation workshops 
[10] with various companies have shown that companies have 
serious problems to grasp the overall idea of Industry 4.0 and 
particular concepts hereof. On the one hand, they are not able 
to relate it to their specific domain and their particular 
business strategy. On the other hand, they experience 
problems in determining their state-of-development with 
regard to the Industry 4.0 vision and therefore fail to identify 
concrete fields of action, programs and projects. To overcome 
growing uncertainty and dissatisfaction in manufacturing 
companies regarding the idea of Industry 4.0, new methods 
and tools are needed to provide guidance and support to align 
business strategies and operations.  


In this paper we will describe the results of a recent 
research effort where we developed a maturity model and a 
related tool to systematically assess manufacturing 
companies’ state-of-development in relation to the Industry 
4.0 vision. Our maturity model serves both a scientific and a 
practical purpose. The scientific purpose aims at gaining solid 
data about the current state of manufacturing companies and 
their Industry 4.0 strategies to extract potential success 
factors. The practical purpose of this work aims at enabling a 
company to rigorously evaluate their own Industry 4.0 
maturity and reflect the fitness of current strategies.  


The paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we discuss 
existing maturity or readiness models in the relating domain 
and derive our research contribution. Followed by section 3 
where our concepts of organizational maturity are described 
as well as the framework to develop the Industry 4.0 Maturity 
Model. In Section 4 we introduce the resulting model and 
details about the procedure to assess maturity. In section 5 we 
outline first findings from a preliminary evaluation by 
discussing the results of a case study conducted in a 
manufacturing company. Finally, in section 6 we conclude 
about main findings, limitations of the model and define 
future research. 


2. Existing maturity and readiness models in relevant 
domains  


In general, the term “maturity” refers to a “state of being 
complete, perfect, or ready” [11] and implies some progress in 
the development of a system. Accordingly, maturing systems 
(e.g. biological, organizational or technological) increase their 
capabilities over time regarding the achievement of some 
desirable future state. Maturity can be captured qualitatively 
or quantitatively in a discrete or continuous manner [12].  


Maturity models are commonly used as an instrument to 
conceptualize and measure maturity of an organization or a 
process regarding some specific target state. Labelled 
synonymously are readiness models with the goal to capture 
the starting-point and allow for initializing the development 
process. We understand the difference between readiness and 
maturity in the matter that readiness assessment takes place 
before engaging in the maturing process whereas maturity 
assessment aims for capturing the as-it-is state whilst the 
maturing process. In the production domain recent readiness 
and maturity models have been proposed for example in 
energy and utility management [13], in eco design 
manufacturing [14] or lean manufacturing [15]. With regard 
to the domain of Industry 4.0 the following models and tools 
for assessing readiness or maturity have been published: 


Table 1. Existing Industry 4.0 readiness and maturity models.  


Model Name Institution/
Source 


Assessment Approach 


IMPULS – Industrie 
4.0 Readiness (2015) 


VDMA, 
RWTH 
Aachen, IW 
Consult 16] 


Assessment in 6 dimension 
including 18 items to indicate 
readiness in 5 levels; barriers 
for progressing to the next 
stage are defined as well as 
advice how to overcome 
them 


Empowered and 
Implementation 
Strategy for Industry 
4.0 (2016) 


Lanza et al. 
[17] 


Assessment of Industry 4.0 
maturity as a quick check and 
part of a process model for 
realization; gap-analyses and 
toolbox for overcoming 
maturity-barriers are 
intended; no details about 
items and development 
process offered 


Industry 4.0 / Digital 
Operations Self 
Assessment (2016) 


Pricewater-
houseCoop
ers [18] 


Online-self assessment in 6 
dimensions; focus on digital 
maturity in 4 levels; 
application as consulting tool 
as fee for assessment is 
required in 3 of the 6 
dimensions; no details about 
items and development 
process offered 





The Connected 
Enterprise Maturity 
Model (2014) 














Rockwell 
Automation 
[19]  














Maturity model as part of a 
five-stage approach to realize 
Industry 4.0; technology 
focused assessment in 4 
dimensions; no details about 
items and development 
process offered (white paper) 


 






163 Andreas Schumacher et al.  /  Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


I 4.0 Reifegradmodell 
(2015) 





FH – 
Oberösterre
ich [20]  


Assessment of maturity in 3 
dimensions including 13 
items for maturity indication; 
maturity is assessed in 10 
levels; no details about items 
and development process 
offered (development process 
not finished) 


 
We want to acknowledge that the development of the 


readiness model “IMPULS – Industrie 4.0 Readiness” is 
based on a comprehensive dataset and details about 
dimensions, items and the approach to assessment are offered. 
The model is scientifically well grounded and its structure and 
results explained in transparent manners. The other 
approaches listed in table 1 offer less details regarding the 
development process, structure and assessment-methodology 
and therefore no base for detailed comparison. Other models 
and tools we found do not offer any details regarding structure 
and content and are therefore not listed.  


Our Industry 4.0 Maturity Model presented in this work 
aims for an extension of existing models and tools through its 
strong focus on organizational aspects. Moreover, we aimed 
for transforming the abstract concepts of smart manufacturing 
into items that can be measured in real production 
environments. Finally, we intentionally offer detailed 
information about the models structure and the assessment 
procedure to ensure transparency for the enterprises applying 
our tool.  


3. Background and methodology 


With regard to the envisioned Fourth Industrial Revolution, 
we understand maturity of an industrial enterprise as the state 
of advancement of internal and external conditions that 
support Industry 4.0’s basic concepts such as the vertical and 
horizontal integration of manufacturing systems and 
enterprises as well as the digital integration of engineering 
across the entire value chain.  


The framework methodology we have used to develop our 
model is based on Becker’s step-by-step process for the 
development of maturity models [21] which has a strong 
theoretical foundation in Hevner’s design science approach 
[22] and offers a rigorous methodology. Following Becker’s 
procedure, a multi-methodological development approach was 
carried out including a systematic literature research and 
review, expert interviews, conceptual modelling and 
validations as well as testing of the new model in the field. 


We carried out a development procedure that includes 
three distinct phases. An initial phase to create complete 
understanding of the domain of Industry 4.0, a core 
development phase to design and architect the model’s 
structure as well as a practically applicable tool and an 
implementation phase to validate the resulting tool in real life 
application. The first steps contained the evaluation of domain 
complexities and a gap analysis of existing maturity models 
applicable to assess Industry 4.0 maturity. Semi-structured 
interviews conducted with practitioners and researchers 
assisted at determining the underlying problem and the 
validation of our research effort as a solution to the problem. 


The experts interviewed (duration of around 60min following 
pre-defined open questions) supported our initial assumptions 
regarding the problems when implementing Industry 4.0 in 
practice: 


 Companies perceive the concepts of Industry 4.0 as highly 
complex with no strategic guidance offered  


 Companies lack a clear idea of Industry 4.0 resulting in 
uncertainty regarding benefits and outcomes 


 Companies fail to assess their own capabilities in Industry 
4.0 which restrains from taking any coordinated measures  


In a next step we performed extensive systematic literature 
research in German and English literature on maturity models 
resulting in more than 3400 findings. At the time we carried 
out the literature research we found no similar model that is 
applicable on the domain of Industry 4.0 has been published. 
However, the comparison of existing models in other domains 
suggests a design strategy where the basic architecture of 
already successfully tested assessment tools serves as a 
starting point for designing our new model. We considered 72 
works on maturity models for further analyses, as they offer 
relevant frameworks or practically tested assessment tools. 
From these works we derived concepts relevant for the 
structure of our model, e.g.: the maturity levels (commonly 5 
levels whereby 1 is the lowest), the dimensions (maturity 
assessed in 4 to 16 dimensions), the mode of assessment (self-
assessment or through external auditor) or the mode of 
representation (numerical representation commonly visualized 
using radar charts). With the help of concept mapping 
techniques, we extracted characteristics of existing maturity 
models and evaluated them for their applicability for our 
model and domain. 


In phase two of the development procedure the overall 
design of the model, the maturity items as well as maturity 
levels and their characteristics were defined. Thereby, we 
used the official recommendations for implementing Industry 
4.0 from the German Government [23] as a basis and included 
scientific works, studies and reports as well the experience 
from our orientation workshops. We defined a total of 62 
maturity items that are unequally grouped into nine 
organizational dimensions.  


Once we completed the development, the third phase 
contained transformation of the model into a practically 
usable tool and the conceptualization of an adequate media for 
distribution. Finally, we employed the assessment tool in two 
industrial enterprises to validate it for real-life application and 
collect feedback for further improvements. 


4. Industry 4.0 Maturity Model  


In order to facilitate different analyses of Industry 4.0 
maturity, the proposed model includes a total of 62 maturity 
items which are grouped into nine company dimensions. 
Table 2 provides an overview on the dimensions together with 
some exemplary items to support understanding. 










164   Andreas Schumacher et al.  /  Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


Table 2. Dimensions and maturity items of Industry 4.0 Maturity Model. 


Dimension Exemplary maturity item 


Strategy Implementation I40 roadmap, Available resources for 
realization, Adaption of business models, … 


Leadership Willingness of leaders, Management competences 
and methods, Existence of central coordination for 
I40, … 


Customers Utilization of customer data, Digitalization of 
sales/services, Costumer’s Digital media competence, 
… 


Products Individualization of products, Digitalization of 
products, Product integration into other systems, … 


Operations Decentralization of processes, Modelling and 
simulation, Interdisciplinary, interdepartmental 
collaboration, … 


Culture Knowledge sharing, Open-innovation and cross 
company collaboration, Value of ICT in company, … 


People ICT competences of employees, openness of 
employees to new technology, autonomy of 
employees, … 


Governance Labour regulations for I40, Suitability of 
technological standards, Protection of intellectual 
property, … 


Technology Existence of modern ICT, Utilization of mobile 
devices, Utilization of machine-to-machine 
communication, … 


I40…Industry 4.0, ICT…Information and Comm. Technology 
 
The evolution path each item undergoes five maturity levels 
where level 1 describes a complete lack of attributes 
supporting the concepts of Industry 4.0 and level 5 represents 
the state-of-the-art of required attributes. Measuring, 
determining and representing the enterprise’s maturity follows 
a three-step procedure (Figure 1) which we integrated in an 
easy-to-handle, software-supported tool. 
 Measurement of maturing items in enterprise via questionnaire


Calculation of  maturity level in nine dimensions software supported Input 
 Representation and visualization of maturity via maturity report and radar chartsOutput  


Fig. 1. Three step procedure to assess Industry4.0 maturity. 


Evaluation of maturity through the maturity items within an 
enterprise is conducted by using a standardized questionnaire 
consisting of one closed-ended question per item. Each 
question requires an answer to a Likert-scale reaching from 1- 
“not distinct” to 5- “very distinct”. For example, for the item 
“Implementation of an Industry 4.0 roadmap” in the 
dimension “Strategy” the question reads as shown in Table 3. 


Table 3. Exemplary question to measure a maturity item. 


External Question  1 2 3 4 5 


Do you use a road map for the 
planning of Industry 4.0 activities 
in your enterprise? 





























 1…Not implemented, 5…Fully implemented 
 
It is important to stress that the questionnaire can only be 
answered properly, if all respondents have a basic 
understanding of the concepts of Industry 4.0. External 
consulting or group sessions can therefore increase the 


questionnaire’s representability and the maturity model’s 
accuracy. Responses to the questionnaire then serve as data-
input for the software tool to calculate and represent the 
maturity level.  
From the expert interviews we found that not all items seem 
to have the same importance for developing towards a mature 
enterprise in the sense of Industry 4.0. For example, in the 
dimension “Technology” the “existence of modern 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)” might 
have a different contribution to Industry 4.0 maturity than the 
item “utilization of mobile devices”. Therefore, expert ratings 
where included into the development procedure to find out the 
item’s maturity-contribution on the one hand, and to validate 
the maturity item’s practical meaningfulness on the other 
hand.  
E-mail based distribution of 123 questionnaires to 
practitioners and researchers resulted in 23 responses. 
Practical importance of each maturity items was rated on a 
Likert-scale reaching from “not important” (rating = 1) to 
“very important” (rating = 4). For example, the item 
“Existence of modern Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT)” was rated with an average importance of 
3.5 out of 4 whereas “utilization of mobile devices” was rated 
with 3.2. The overall-average of the 23 ratings for 62 items is 
3.2 out of 4 which supports the meaningfulness of the model’s 
content.  
In a next step the maturity level (MD) of each dimension 
results from calculating the weighted average of all maturity 
items (MDIi) within its related dimension.  The weighting-
factor (gDIi) equals the average importance rating from all 23 
experts for each item.  The maturity level is calculated using 
the following Formula: 





M…Maturity  
D…Dimension 
I…Item 
g…Weighting Factor                
n…Number of Maturity Item 
 


As maturity models tend to fail if they are too complex thus 
practical not applicable, we adjusted the level of detail and 
mode of representation to practical needs of industrial 
companies. Therefore, we transformed our model into an 
easy-to-use assessment tool that can be used by companies to 
self-assess their Industry 4.0 maturity. After receiving 
responses to the questionnaire (e.g. questionnaire integrated 
into a webpage), the answers are processed in software 
supported manners and the results are automatically 
calculated and summarized in a compact maturity report 
consisting of eleven pages. The first pages of the report 
contain the maturity dashboard depicting all maturity levels in 
nine dimensions at-a-glance, followed by determinations and 
definitions of the maturity levels and their characteristics. 
Finally, the detailed results of the items in the nine 
dimensions are presented and serve as the bases for strategic 
decisions and the definition of specific projects and programs.  
In order to evaluate the content and structure of our model, as 
well as for testing practical usability of the assessment tool, 
we conducted two case studies in industrial enterprises. The 
results of one case-study are presented in the next chapter. 






165 Andreas Schumacher et al.  /  Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


5. Case-study in Industrial Enterprise 


In the following, results obtained from a case-study with an 
Austrian manufacturing enterprise with around 400 
employees which designs and manufactures aerospace 
components and test equipment are presented. To ensure 
accuracy of results, we have chosen an organization that 
already is engaged in Industry 4.0 and therefore possesses 
required basic knowledge and understanding about its basic 
concepts.  


The company received a questionnaire per e-mail to allow 
for reflected assessment of their internal situation on their 
own time. Although self-assessment of the maturity items is a 
valid method and easy to conduct, we are aware that most 
companies at the time do not possess the required knowledge 
about Industry 4.0 to self-assess the maturity of their own 
company. Following the second phase of the assessment 
procedure (see Figure 1), the response then was inserted into 
the software tool to calculate the maturity levels and to create 
the maturity report. In Figure 2 the maturity level in nine 
dimensions is visualized. A radar chart is used to depict the 
overall result at-a-glance.  








Figure 2: Radar chart visualizing Industry 4.0 maturity in nine dimensions. 


To increase understanding about the model’s systemic, the 
assessment and calculation of the dimension Nr. 1 named 
“Strategy” is presented in detail. The company self-assessed 
the six contained maturity items with maturities ( )  
between 1 and 5 (see Figure 3): 
 


  
Figure 3: Detailed results for dimension Strategy. 





 (Utilization of an I4.0 roadmap) = 1;  = 3,2 
 (Availability of resources) = 3;  = 3,5 
 (Comm. and Docum. of I40-activites) = 1;  = 3,0 
 (Suitability of business models) = 4;  = 2,9 
 (Strategy for digital transformation) = 3;  = 3,4 
 (Alignment of I40 with comp.-vision) = 4;  = 3,4 


 
The relating weighting factors  are also presented in the 
respective line of the item. Using the formula presented 
earlier, the maturity of the dimension “Strategy”  is now 
calculated resulting in an maturity-level of 2,7 out of 5.  


= 2,7  


The level 2.7 out of 5 is the lowest rating of all nine 
dimensions. It is caused mainly by the missing “utilization of 
an Industry 4.0 roadmap” as well as missing “communication 
and documentation of Industry 4.0 activities”. 
The seemingly high maturity level in the dimension 
“Products” (see Figure 2) is justifiable, as the manufactured 
aerospace components naturally show highly mature 
characteristics in regard to Industry 4.0. For example, 
measured maturity items in this dimension were (among 
others) “the possibility to integrate products into other 
systems”, “the autonomy of products”, the “flexibility of 
product characteristics” or “the possibility to digitalize 
products”. It is plausible that components for the application 
in aerospace possess product characteristics that lead to a high 
rating of these maturity items. The high maturity levels in 
other dimensions seem accurate as well, as the chosen 
company is considered an early adaptor of the concepts of 
Industry 4.0 by several technical journals in Austria.  
To enable assessment in five levels comprehensive knowledge 
about the potential of Industry 4.0 regarding all items is 
required. Therefore, either the individuals within the company 
possess or gain enough knowledge, or an external auditor is 
invited to support critical assessment. An effective approach 
to support reflected assessment of the company’s own 
situation is to present advanced industry cases in the 
respective dimension (benchmarking).  
We collected feedback from the assessed enterprise regarding 
clarity of the questionnaire, transparency and consistency of 
the tool and understandability of the modes of representation  
which was positive throughout. Analysis of the applied 
assessment procedure in the research team led to the 
identification of necessary improvements and potential further 
developments which will be discussed in the next section.  


6. Conclusion 


The research work presented here aimed for the 
development of a maturity model and a related tool for 
assessing the Industry 4.0 maturity of manufacturing 
enterprises. The model has been developed using a multi-
methodological approach including a systematic literature 
review, conceptual modelling and qualitative and quantitative 
methods for empirical validation. 


In contrast to other approaches the major contribution of 
this research effort is the inclusion of various organizational 
aspects resulting in a more comprehensive model. However, 


2,7


3,1


5,0


3,0


3,2
3,4


4,0


3,7


2,6


1,0


2,0


3,0


4,0


5,0
Strategy


Leadership


Products


Customers


OperationsCulture


People


Governance


Technology


1,0


3,0


1,0


4,0


3,0


4,0


1,0


2,0


3,0


4,0


5,0


Utilization of an Industry 4.0
roadmap


Availaibility of resources for
Industry 4.0


Communication and
Documentation of Industry


4.0-activities


Suitability of existing
business models for Industry


4.0


Existence of strategy for
digital transformation


Compatibility of Industry 4.0
with company strategies






166   Andreas Schumacher et al.  /  Procedia CIRP   52  ( 2016 )  161 – 166 


the transformation of the model in a handy software tool also 
enabled its application in practice. First experiences from the 
field show that manufacturing companies are able to use the 
results of their self-assessment as a solid point of reference for 
further strategic measures.  


From a scientific point of view, we developed a conceptual 
model of maturity for Industry 4.0. This conceptual model 
allows us to collect data on the state-of-development of 
manufacturing companies across different industries and to 
identify additional success factors for effective Industry 4.0 
strategies. 


Currently our model targets manufacturing companies that 
are producing physical goods in-house with their own 
manufacturing machinery, have a determined customer group 
(B2B or B2C) and have distinct structures (possibility to 
analyse processes). These constraints result from the defined 
maturity dimensions and maturity items as the calculation-
mechanism requires responses to each item and N/A-answers 
are not allowed.  


Future research activities will mainly aim at a method to 
identify company-specific target states, improved accuracy of 
the maturity items as well as defining strategic steps to reach 
the indented maturity levels. Furthermore, road maps to 
improve maturity of specific items and related dimensions 
will be developed to allow for determining strategic programs 
and projects. Based on the findings of this generic maturity 
model, a more domain specific model for the assessment of 
Industry 4.0 maturity in automotive manufacturing companies 
is planned.  


On a final note, the maturity model is not intended as an 
easy route towards attaining Industry 4.0 maturity. However, 
our maturity model can assist with the difficult task of 
reflecting on the current capabilities regarding Industry 4.0 
and the subsequent decision on respective strategies and 
action plans. 


References 


[1] David M. Gligor and Mary C. Holcomb, “Understanding the role of 
logistics capabilities in achieving supply chain agility: a systematic 
literature review,” Supp Chain Mnagmnt, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 438–453, Jun. 
2012. 


[2] O. de Weck, D. Reed, S. Sarma, and M. Schmidt, “Trends in Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology Research,” MIT, 2013. 


[3] J. Nukeaw and W. Pecharpa, Advances in Material Science and 
Technology, vol. 802. TTP, 2013. 


[4] J. Zhou, “Digitalization and intelligentization of manufacturing industry,” 
Adv. Manuf., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Mar. 2013. 


[5] G. Lanza, B. Haefner, and A. Kraemer, “Optimization of selective 
assembly and adaptive manufacturing by means of cyber-physical system 


based matching,” CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, vol. 64, no. 
1, pp. 399–402, 2015. 


[6] L. Monostori, “Cyber-physical Production Systems: Roots, Expectations 
and R&amp;D Challenges,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 17, pp. 9–13, 2014. 


[7] R. Gao, L. Wang, R. Teti, D. Dornfeld, S. Kumara, M. Mori, and M. 
Helu, “Cloud-enabled prognosis for manufacturing,” CIRP Annals - 
Manu-facturing Technology, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 749–772, 2015. 


[8] R. Berger, “INDUSTRY 4.0 – The new industrial revolution,” 
www.rolandberger.com, 03-Jun-2014. [Accessed: 21-Dec-2015]. 


[9] G. Schuh, T. Potente, R. Varandani, and T. Schmitz, “Global Footprint 
Design based on genetic algorithms – An ‘Industry 4.0’ perspective,” 
CIRP Annals - Manuf. Technology, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 433–436, 2014. 


[10] S. Erol, A. Schumacher, and W. Sihn, “Strategic guidance towards 
Industry 4.0 – a three-stage process model,” in Proc. of Interna-tional 
Conference on Competitive Manufacturing 2016 (COMA16), 
Stellenbosch, South Africa. 


[11] J. A. Simpson, E. S. C. Weiner, and Oxford University Press, Eds., The  
Oxford English dictionary, 2nd ed. Oxford : Oxford ; New York: Clar-
endon Press ; Oxford University Press, 1989. 


[12] M. Kohlegger, R. Maier, and S. Thalmann, “Understanding Maturity 
Models Results of a structured Content Analysis,” presented at the I-
KNOW ’09 and I-SEMANTICS ’09, Graz, Austria, 2009. 


[13] E. W. . Ngai, D. C. K. Chau, J. K. L. Poon, and C. K. M. To, “Energy 
and utility management maturity model for sustainable manufacturing 
process,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 146, no. 2, 
pp. 453–464, Dec. 2013. 


[14] D. C. A. Pigosso, H. Rozenfeld, and T. C. McAloone, “Ecodesign 
maturi-ty model: a management framework to support ecodesign imple-
mentation into manufacturing companies,” Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction, vol. 59, pp. 160–173, Nov. 2013. 


[15] M. A. Maasouman and K. Demirli, “Assessment of Lean Maturity Level 
in Manufacturing Cells,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 1876–
1881, 2015. 


[16] K. Lichtblau, V. Stich, R. Bertenrath, M. Blum, M. Bleider, A. Millack, 
K. Schmitt, E. Schmitz, and M. Schröter, “IMPULS - Industrie 4.0-
Readiness,” Impuls-Stiftung des VDMA, Aachen-Köln, 2015. 


[17] G. Lanza, P. Nyhuis, S. M. Ansari, T. Kuprat, and C. Liebrecht, 
“Befähigungs- und Einführungsstrategien für Industrie 4.0,” Karlsruhe /   
Hannover, 01-02/2016. 


[18] PricewaterhouseCoopers, “The Industry 4.0 / Digital Operations Self  
Assessment,” 2016. 


[19] Rockwell Automation, “The Connected Enterprise Maturity Model,” 
Rockwell Automation. 


[20] FH - Oberösterreich, “I 4.0 Reifegradmodell,” n.d. 
[21] J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, and J. Pöppelbuß, “Developing Maturity 


Models for IT Management: A Procedure Model and its Application,” 
Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 213–222, 
Jun. 2009. 


[22] A. R. Hevner, T. M. Salvatore, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in 
Information Systems Research,” MIS Research Center, pp. 75 – 105, 
2004. 


[23] H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, and J. Helbig, “Deutschlands Zukunft als 
Produktionsstandort sichern. Umsetzungsempfehlungen für das 
Zukunftsprojekt Industrie 4.0,” DFKI und Deutsche Post, 2013. 





 




