









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.comAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com


ScienceDirect
Procedia CIRP 00 (2017) 000–000


  www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 


2212-8271 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


28th CIRP Design Conference, May 2018, Nantes, France


A new methodology to analyze the functional and physical architecture of 
existing products for an assembly oriented product family identification 


Paul Stief *, Jean-Yves Dantan, Alain Etienne, Ali Siadat 
École Nationale Supérieure d’Arts et Métiers, Arts et Métiers ParisTech, LCFC EA 4495, 4 Rue Augustin Fresnel, Metz 57078, France 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 3 87 37 54 30; E-mail address: paul.stief@ensam.eu


Abstract 


In today’s business environment, the trend towards more product variety and customization is unbroken. Due to this development, the need of 
agile and reconfigurable production systems emerged to cope with various products and product families. To design and optimize production
systems as well as to choose the optimal product matches, product analysis methods are needed. Indeed, most of the known methods aim to 
analyze a product or one product family on the physical level. Different product families, however, may differ largely in terms of the number and 
nature of components. This fact impedes an efficient comparison and choice of appropriate product family combinations for the production
system. A new methodology is proposed to analyze existing products in view of their functional and physical architecture. The aim is to cluster
these products in new assembly oriented product families for the optimization of existing assembly lines and the creation of future reconfigurable 
assembly systems. Based on Datum Flow Chain, the physical structure of the products is analyzed. Functional subassemblies are identified, and 
a functional analysis is performed. Moreover, a hybrid functional and physical architecture graph (HyFPAG) is the output which depicts the 
similarity between product families by providing design support to both, production system planners and product designers. An illustrative
example of a nail-clipper is used to explain the proposed methodology. An industrial case study on two product families of steering columns of 
thyssenkrupp Presta France is then carried out to give a first industrial evaluation of the proposed approach. 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


Keywords: Assembly; Design method; Family identification


1. Introduction 


Due to the fast development in the domain of 
communication and an ongoing trend of digitization and
digitalization, manufacturing enterprises are facing important
challenges in today’s market environments: a continuing
tendency towards reduction of product development times and
shortened product lifecycles. In addition, there is an increasing
demand of customization, being at the same time in a global 
competition with competitors all over the world. This trend, 
which is inducing the development from macro to micro 
markets, results in diminished lot sizes due to augmenting
product varieties (high-volume to low-volume production) [1]. 
To cope with this augmenting variety as well as to be able to
identify possible optimization potentials in the existing
production system, it is important to have a precise knowledge


of the product range and characteristics manufactured and/or 
assembled in this system. In this context, the main challenge in
modelling and analysis is now not only to cope with single 
products, a limited product range or existing product families,
but also to be able to analyze and to compare products to define
new product families. It can be observed that classical existing
product families are regrouped in function of clients or features.
However, assembly oriented product families are hardly to find. 


On the product family level, products differ mainly in two
main characteristics: (i) the number of components and (ii) the
type of components (e.g. mechanical, electrical, electronical). 


Classical methodologies considering mainly single products 
or solitary, already existing product families analyze the
product structure on a physical level (components level) which 
causes difficulties regarding an efficient definition and
comparison of different product families. Addressing this 


Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587


2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems.
10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.159


© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems.





Available  online  at  www.sciencedirect.com  


ScienceDirect  
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 














2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 


Oh, no – not another policy! Oh, yes - an OT-policy! 
 John Lindströma,*, Petra Viklundb, Fredrik Tidemanb, Berndt Hällgrenb, Jonny Elvelinc  


aLuleå University of Technology, 971 87 Luleå, Sweden  
bLuleå Kommun, 971 85 Luleå, Sweden 


cW3IT Norrbotten AB, 972 95 Luleå, Sweden 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +46920491528. E-mail address: john.lindstrom@ltu.se 


Abstract 


The paper addresses the need for a policy document in organizations concerned with Operational Technologies (OT) within their production and 
operational environments, and secondly how such an OT policy was developed and crafted by a Swedish municipality and its water production 
and wastewater management department. The first initial design criteria was to clearly distinguish the IT environment from the OT environment 
and the second design criteria was to achieve an improved, affordable and maintainable cybersecurity level for the OT environment. The results 
of the paper are an initial OT policy and an action plan for the necessary technical and organizational change in the OT environment. 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


 Keywords: cybersecurity; Operational Technology (OT); OT policy; production systems 


 
1.  Introduction 


The paper concerns the parts of an action research effort at 
a Swedish municipal water production and waste water 
management department, where the cybersecurity level for a 
majority of the Operational Technology0F0F *  (OT) has been 
investigated, assessed, improved and responsibilities clarified. 
The term OT comprises the technology related to process 
industrial IT and automation and is apparently similar to much 
of the equipment (i.e., firewalls, routers, switches, servers, PCs, 
etc.) used in the IT environment. This equipment is required to 
monitor, operate and control, for instance, a company’s 
production environment and processes [1] for: pulp/paper, oil, 
gas, electricity, heat, food, clean water, wastewater 
management, minerals and data centres, etc. However, the OT 
equipment is used for different purposes than the IT equipment 
and uses a number of completely different communications 


 
 
* “Operational Technology” briefly explained - 
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/operational-technology 


protocols (which, however, can partly be tunneled in an IP-
based network). In addition, in OT-networks a number of 
specific devices such as Programmable Logic Controls (PLs), 
sensors, actuators, pumps, valves, SCADA based systems, etc. 
are commonly present (sometimes in large numbers) together 
with the main production equipment. The OT equipment and 
connected production equipment are commonly located in an 
OT network, which may be connected to an IT network or kept 
separated due to cybersecurity concerns. Cybersecurity is an 
issue for most OT networks and equipment [1-2] due to the 
long lifecycles, i.e., commonly 5-30 years compared to 2-8 
years in an IT environment. Further, most of the OT equipment 
has been developed with an inherent low level of cybersecurity 
measures – often not exceeding username/password level and 
any additional security measures need to be “bolted on”, which 
makes it complex and hard to manage over time. In addition, to 
not impair the availability level of the production networks, the 





Available  online  at  www.sciencedirect.com  


ScienceDirect  
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 














2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 


Oh, no – not another policy! Oh, yes - an OT-policy! 
 John Lindströma,*, Petra Viklundb, Fredrik Tidemanb, Berndt Hällgrenb, Jonny Elvelinc  


aLuleå University of Technology, 971 87 Luleå, Sweden  
bLuleå Kommun, 971 85 Luleå, Sweden 


cW3IT Norrbotten AB, 972 95 Luleå, Sweden 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +46920491528. E-mail address: john.lindstrom@ltu.se 


Abstract 


The paper addresses the need for a policy document in organizations concerned with Operational Technologies (OT) within their production and 
operational environments, and secondly how such an OT policy was developed and crafted by a Swedish municipality and its water production 
and wastewater management department. The first initial design criteria was to clearly distinguish the IT environment from the OT environment 
and the second design criteria was to achieve an improved, affordable and maintainable cybersecurity level for the OT environment. The results 
of the paper are an initial OT policy and an action plan for the necessary technical and organizational change in the OT environment. 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 52nd CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems. 


 Keywords: cybersecurity; Operational Technology (OT); OT policy; production systems 


 
1.  Introduction 


The paper concerns the parts of an action research effort at 
a Swedish municipal water production and waste water 
management department, where the cybersecurity level for a 
majority of the Operational Technology0F0F *  (OT) has been 
investigated, assessed, improved and responsibilities clarified. 
The term OT comprises the technology related to process 
industrial IT and automation and is apparently similar to much 
of the equipment (i.e., firewalls, routers, switches, servers, PCs, 
etc.) used in the IT environment. This equipment is required to 
monitor, operate and control, for instance, a company’s 
production environment and processes [1] for: pulp/paper, oil, 
gas, electricity, heat, food, clean water, wastewater 
management, minerals and data centres, etc. However, the OT 
equipment is used for different purposes than the IT equipment 
and uses a number of completely different communications 


 
 
* “Operational Technology” briefly explained - 
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/operational-technology 


protocols (which, however, can partly be tunneled in an IP-
based network). In addition, in OT-networks a number of 
specific devices such as Programmable Logic Controls (PLs), 
sensors, actuators, pumps, valves, SCADA based systems, etc. 
are commonly present (sometimes in large numbers) together 
with the main production equipment. The OT equipment and 
connected production equipment are commonly located in an 
OT network, which may be connected to an IT network or kept 
separated due to cybersecurity concerns. Cybersecurity is an 
issue for most OT networks and equipment [1-2] due to the 
long lifecycles, i.e., commonly 5-30 years compared to 2-8 
years in an IT environment. Further, most of the OT equipment 
has been developed with an inherent low level of cybersecurity 
measures – often not exceeding username/password level and 
any additional security measures need to be “bolted on”, which 
makes it complex and hard to manage over time. In addition, to 
not impair the availability level of the production networks, the 






 John Lindström  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587 583
2 John Lindström et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


OT environments are commonly only updated once or twice a 
year, requiring comprehensive testing prior to the rollout of any 
updates, patches, upgrades or changes. This is a major 
difference compared to an IT environment, where normally 
critical security updates are rather quickly dispatched after 
swift testing and many organizations update their IT 
environment 3-5 times a year after adequate testing and 
verification. However, within water production and wastewater 
management the flexibility for smaller updates and changes is 
greater than in, for example, a pulp/paper setting.  


Most organizations have an IT policy as well as IT or 
information security policies. Interestingly, very few 
organizations have an OT policy, although the OT environment 
may be both larger and more expensive than the IT 
environment and essential for the organization. Thus, an OT 
policy is likely necessary in organizations with production 
environments of significance – although many employees may 
say “Oh, no – not another policy!”. The paper will outline the 
chain of events that led to the crafting of an OT policy as part 
of an action research effort.  


The rationale for the action research effort was to initiate 
change and improve the cybersecurity level of the OT 
environment. However, it was first necessary to clarify the 
ownership of the IT and OT environments as well as the 
responsibilities for development, operations and maintenance, 
etc. Further, an OT environment is also often part of new offers 
such as Product-Service Systems/Industrial Product-Service 
Systems [3-4] or Functional Products [5-6], which means that 
providers of such offers must also consider an OT policy as 
well due to the additional responsibilities and risks transferred 
from the customer to the provider. 


This paper addresses the question as to whether 
organizations with significant OT environments should have an 
OT policy or not as well as what may be needed technically and 
organization-wise to achieve an improved cybersecurity level 
for OT environments. Further, the purpose is to make senior 
management teams, IT- and OT-related personnel, and R&D 
managers aware of the need for an adequate cybersecurity level 
within OT networks and the organizational issues that may 
need to be managed to achieve this. The paper is organized such 
that the research approach follows the introduction and related 
work.  Further, this is followed by the result section, including 
an analysis and evaluation and, finally, the discussion and 
conclusions section. 


2.  Related work 


An OT environment comprises the equipment, which is 
required to monitor, operate and control a production 
environment and its processes, and the related production 
equipment. The OT environments used in various industries are 
challenged by many of the obstacles and issues in the 5 main 
categories described by Lee et al. [7]. Further, additional areas 
of interest are: cybersecurity [1-2], predictive maintenance [8-
10], monitoring [9], sustainable and intelligent production [11-
13]. These are all relevant and should be considered in order to 
keep a high level of availability as well as robustness of the OT 
environments. However, more specifically, concerning 
cybersecurity within OT environments, which include Internet-


of-Things (IoT) or industrial IoT, a number of security/safety-
related laws and recommendations are specific for each 
country. Within the EU several directives and 
recommendations are applicable [cf. 14-15]. These provide the 
legal framework and recommendations for the operation and 
management of OT environments. A recent contribution to the 
improvement of cybersecurity within OT environments is the 
industrial internet-based Arrowhead Framework [16], which 
includes a baseline functionality level for cybersecurity, cloud-
based automation, greater flexibility and engineering 
simplicity. The Arrowhead Framework further supports the 
RAMI4.0 framework, which is developed to enable transition 
from traditional ISA-95-based architectures toward 
Industry4.0-based production environments, where more and 
more IT will get into the OT. The use of more IT in the OT is 
also indicated by for instance Hahn [1]. Piggins [2] further 
outlines that hackers and viruses increasingly targets OT 
environments in terms of industrial control systems and 
SCADA-based systems, which requires an increased awareness 
and protection of these. 


For most OT environments, availability and robustness are 
of the utmost importance. Simulation and frameworks for 
improvement of availability in industrial OT and production 
environments have been outlined in for instance [17-18], where 
operational data is used to improve the models. 


Very little has been written on OT policies, although these 
policies can sometimes be integrated into other types of 
documents such as IT or information security policies, 
automation strategies or production environment plans. Thus, 
the term OT policy seems novel and fitting for the context, 
providing a missing piece for the management of organizations 
with extensive production and operational environments. 


3.  Research approach 


The research approach employed in this study, done in 
collaboration with a Swedish municipality, has been based on 
an indepth qualitative study using action research. It would also 
have been possible to use for instance a spiral model with 
gradual refinement of the research as well. The municipality 
has a population of less than 100,000 inhabitants and is wide-
spread geographically over more than 2000 square kilometers 
(which is a rather large area requiring extensive OT networks 
and large amounts of equipment). The target OT area has 
mainly been the production of clean drinking water and 
wastewater management, which are considered critical 
infrastructure by the EU [14-15]. The research targeted in this 
paper is the first cycle of an action research [19] effort where 
the researcher has had the roles of external expert/consultant. 
The research has been conducted from the start of 2016 until 
the end of 2018. Action research has been defined as “a 
participatory, democratic process concerned with developing 
practical knowing in the pursuit of worthwhile human 
purposes, grounded in a participatory worldview which we 
believe is emerging at this historical moment. It seeks to bring 
together action and reflection, theory and practice, in 
participation with others, in the pursuit of practical solutions 
to issues of pressing concern to people, and more generally the 
flourishing of individual persons and their communities" [19]. 






584 John Lindström  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587
 John Lindström et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  3 


The characteristics of action research are: (1) that action 
researchers act in the studied situations, and (2) that action 
research involves two goals. The goals pertain to solving the 
problem (the role of the consultant) and making a contribution 
to knowledge (the role of the researcher); further, that action 
research requires interaction and cooperation between 
researchers and the client personnel and, finally, that action 
research can include all types of data gathering methods [20]. 
In accordance with [21], the action research approach 
encompasses 4 phases: diagnosing, planning action, taking 
action and evaluating the action in relation to a certain context 
and with a specific purpose. The results of a literature review, 
which was part of the first phase, were used as input for the 
diagnosis. The phases were completed with an iterative and 
reflective case management methodology.  


The data pertaining to the first phase, i.e., technical and 
organizational needs for change, were collected during 8 
workshops [22] (involving 4-12 key respondents from the IT 
department, OT development/operation/maintenance 
departments as well as management persons at each workshop) 
and 10 semi-structured open-ended interviews [23-24] with key 
respondents from the IT and OT departments. The workshops 
and interviews were conducted from early 2016 until late 2018. 
The respondents were well aware of and knowledgeable 
regarding IT networks and IT management, OT-networks, 
production systems/equipment and cybersecurity. 


To collect data after the workshops semi-structured 
interviews with open-ended questions [23-24] were used, 
allowing the respondents to give detailed answers and the 
possibility to add extra information where deemed necessary 
[25]. The duration of the interviews was between one and three 
hours. The collected data were displayed and analyzed using 
matrices (cf. [26]) and the outcomes of the planning action 
efforts were summarized into matrices as well. The analyzed 
data were finally summarized into two matrices comprising the 
diagnosis in terms of technical and organizational needs for 
change (see Tables 1 and 2), and a plan for action (see Figure 
2). Some results from the taking-action phase are also outlined 
in section 4. 


The first initial design criterion for the organizational 
change required was to suggest a clear and rational division of 
responsibilities and where the IT and OT environments should 
be separated. The second initial design criterion was to achieve 
an improved, affordable and maintainable cybersecurity level 
for the OT environment. The design criteria are evaluated and 
discussed in the last section of the paper in order to learn if 
another policy (i.e., the OT policy) is actually needed and if the 
required changes have led to an improved cybersecurity level 
for the OT environments addressed. Semi-structured interviews 
were used during the evaluation of the result of the research and 
the design criteria. 


4.  OT environment – technical and organizational change 
and improvement of cybersecurity level 


Figure 1 provides a simplified overview of the old IT/OT-
architecture set-up. Further, in Figure 1 the IT networks had the 
outgoing main connection to the Internet, whereas the OT 
networks were connected in between via different technologies 


and mediums. The OT networks were built up using a rather 
traditional ISA-95 architecture [27]. 














Fig. 1. Simplified IT/OT network set-up before the change. 


During the diagnosis phase, the needs for technical and 
organizational changes were revealed and collected. These are 
listed below in Tables 1 and 2, and prioritized according to high 
importance (H), medium importance (M) and low importance 
(L). High importance means that something needs to be 
addressed within one year, medium importance that something 
needs to be addressed within 2 years, and low importance at a 
later stage. The prioritizations were decided by the 
municipality. 


Table 1. Diagnosis - need for technical change. 


Technical issue or need Priority 


1.) Division and demarcation in between the IT  and OT 
environments. Problems or cyberattacks arising in either of 
the IT  or the OT environments should not be able to 
propagate to each other. 


H 


2.) Key objects in the OT network must have 24x7 
monitoring and alarms. 


M 


3.) Cyberattacks using IoT equipment for entry, such as 
cameras and sensors, at end-points should be prevented. 


H 


4.) The OT environment must continue to work without the 
IT environment in case of problems or cyberattacks. 


H 


5.) The plans and procedures in the production process must 
have alternative procedures (manual) as well as work-
arounds in case of issues arising in the OT environment. 


H 


6.) An extended OT-test environment should be built up to 
be able to test more configurations and test cases prior to 
roll-outs in production. 


M 


7.) Use simulators to support decision-making in complex 
situations prior to taking action based on experience and 
estimations. 


M 


8.) Monitor and keep control of equipment that is connected 
to the OT network in order to prevent non-authorized 
equipment from being connected to the network and used. 


H 


Internet


IT-­‐related
networks


OT-­‐related
networks


Firewall






 John Lindström  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587 585
4 John Lindström et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


9.) Improve the support process and support system for OT-
related issues. Response times should be clarified and 
necessary changes made to adhere to the response times 
investigated (e.g., internal and external service level 
agreements). 


H 


10.) Ensure that all essential backup processes in the OT 
environment work and that the data can be restored. Should 
be done on a regular basis. 


H 


11.) Important OT servers should have own physical 
hardware and not only be run as virtual ones. 


M 


12.) Log management needs to be improved and logs should 
be further analyzed in order to detect additional anomalies. 


M 


13.) The level of documentation of the OT environment 
needs to be improved in certain areas. Further, the 
documentation should only be made available electronically 
to employees who need to know. 


H 


 
The technical change needs with a high importance (H) 


prioritization were passed on to the next phase action planning. 


 Table 2. Diagnosis - need for organizational change. 


Organizational issue or need Priority 


1.) Responsibilities to be clarified in terms of ownership and 
responsibility for development, operation and maintenance 
for the IT and OT environments. 


H 


2.) Continuous co-planning and sharing of information and 
changes in between the IT department and OT-related 
departments. This should be on operational as well as tactical 
levels during the normal work processes and also on strategic 
level when necessary prior to long-term and important 
decisions. 


H 


3.) Knowledge/skill map. Ensure that the required 
knowledge and skills are available within the organization 
and overlap individual employees  in order to avoid gaps in 
case a key employee leaves or is absent on a long-term basis, 
etc. 


H 


 
The organizational needs with a high importance (H) 


prioritization, i.e., all of them, were also passed on to the next 
phase, planning action. 


The high-level plan for action regarding technical and 
organizational change is outlined in Figure 2. Firstly, the 
responsibilities and ownership have been delimited at the 
firewall between the IT and OT networks. This clarifies 
organizational issues and improves the decision-making. 
Additional processes for enhanced interaction in between the IT 
and OT parts will also be set up, such as faster incident/problem 
management, general collaboration and change management. 
Further, the OT networks will be separated and segmented 
according to EU ENISA [13, 26] and national 
recommendations, using firewalls and other equipment, into 
smaller and independent networks. The individual OT 
networks, and the processes that run within these, will be 
independent of the functionality of the IT networks as well as 
other OT networks. The set-up of the smaller and segmented 
OT networks will be guided by the availability requirements, 
i.e., max downtime of 1/2/4/8/16 hours for the function 
provided by the specific OT network, which has impact on the 
level of redundancy of equipment, electricity backups and 
redundant outgoing communications connections, etc. For all 
essential functionalities, manual work-arounds will be 


documented and implemented in case the ordinary processes 
break down for any reason. Further, all communications outside 
of the OT network firewalls are encrypted and the networks 
outside of an OT firewall are considered as hostile. 
Authentication, access control and authorization will continue 
to be used in the OT networks; however, in some cases, with 
more advanced authentication methods and stricter access 
rights depending on the user’s role and work descriptions. 











Fig. 2. High-level plan for action regarding technical and organizational change 
within the IT/OT networks. 


Further, an OT policy was crafted in order to collect all 
essential OT-related requirements and operative and 
management needs into a policy document in order to: (1) 
highlight the OT area and its importance on top management 
level, (2) get a condensed collection of rules for management 
and operations within the OT area and (3) ensure an adequate 
cybersecurity level including all sub-matters which that 
encompasses. Further, some key objects in the OT networks 
will get improved monitoring. The initial OT policy crafted 
must first be accepted and decided upon by top management 
and the governing board of the municipality, and then later on 
gradually be refined as it is used and new matters are dealt with. 


Thus, the plan for action (Figure 2) will make the municipal 
OT additionally robust, secure and have independent sub-
networks that will continue to provide their functionality, even 
in the event of problems elsewhere in the IT or OT networks. 


4.1	
  Analysis	
  and	
  evaluation	
  
Concerning Table 1, the change needs with high importance, 


#1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10 and 13, are all part of the high-level plan in 
Figure 2 (although #3, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 13 are not all clearly 
visible in Figure 2). The change needs with medium 
importance, #2, 6, 7, 11 and 12, will be addressed later on. 
However, #2 and 11 are already being incrementally addressed. 


Internet


OT-­‐related
network


Firewall


IT-­‐related
networks


Firewall


OT-­‐related
network


OT-­‐related
network


…






586 John Lindström  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587
 John Lindström et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  5 


Regarding Table 2 all change needs were selected and will 
be dealt with. The change need #1, responsibilities and 
ownership, is clearly outlined as the dashed border in Figure 2. 
Change needs #2 and #3 will be managed as part of 
planned/ongoing administrative improvements. 


Pertaining to Figure 2, according to the plan for action, the 
OT parts will undergo significant changes and some of the 
changes have already been made. Thus, the action research 
effort has already resulted in actual changes. The changes are 
further outlined below (and also discussed in the discussion and 
conclusions section). 


Finally, the evaluation of the design criteria is summarized 
below: 
•   The first design criterion - a clear and rational division 


of responsibilities and where the IT and OT 
environments should be separated has been planned (see 
dashed line in Figure 2) and started to be implemented. 
Further, during the evaluation interview the question “Is 
an OT policy needed?” was posed. The answer was: 
“yes” in order to “complement the organization’s IT 
policy and IT-related guidelines”. Consequently, an OT 
policy and OT-related guidelines were crafted to set up 
and clarify the long-term management, responsibilities, 
authorizations and rules of usage for the OT parts over 
their lifecycles. 


•   The second design criterion – to achieve an improved, 
affordable and maintainable cybersecurity level for the 
OT environment – will be met. However, to be fully 
implemented, some of the changes may require one or 
more action research cycles. Further, the questions “Did 
it improve?” was also answered with a “yes” through 
“improved risk management (i.e., risk-based) and 
further robust/resilient and flexible infrastructure”. 


5.  Discussion and conclusions 


The paper contributes to the literature by introducing the 
concept of an OT policy as well as outlining the benefits of, and 
reasons for, having an OT policy that complements the IT 
policy. The OT policy can be seen as a way to increase the 
awareness of and manage many of the risks, issues and 
problems brought up in for instance [1-2, 7-11, 14-18]. It is 
quite common that the OT part is equally large as the IT part or 
even larger, more complex and expensive – which requires a 
firm long-term management over the lifecycles with clear 
responsibilities and authorizations. Further, the paper 
contributes to practice by providing a number of technical and 
organizational change needs that are likely similar in many 
other organizations with production or operation environments 
that have OT networks. The OT networks will become even 
more robust from separation and segmentation, as they will 
become smaller and less complex, and it will be easier to find 
and faster to fix problems as they occur compared to in larger 
networks. The managerial contribution of the paper is a case 
that can be analyzed and learnt from, that an OT policy can 
provide a good managerial tool and also highlight the 
importance of the OT area on top-management and risk-
management levels. 


The research has resulted in changes (see Figure 2), which 
is one of the main objectives of an action research effort. 
However, some of the changes may need one or more action 
research cycles to be fully implemented and taken up by the 
organization. 


Both the first criterion and the second criterion were deemed 
to be met. However, to be fully implemented, some of the 
changes required may take one or more action research cycles. 


Concerning future research, project proposals to improve 
the extent and generalizability of the OT policy have been 
initiated and will also include an evaluation with other 
industries and their problems and risks.  


The results outlined in the paper can be useful for 
organizations working in IT and OT environments, aiding 
optimization and improvement of the management of the 
respective environment through the lifecycles. Further, the 
proposed clarification of responsibilities and ownership is key 
for long-term through-lifecycle management. 


Finally, efforts like the one described in this paper are 
necessary for many manufacturing and process industry 
companies as well as public-sector organizations, such as 
infrastructure providers and municipalities, in order to achieve 
an adequate level of cybersecurity for their OT environments 
and to clarify the line of ownership and responsibility between 
the IT and the OT. This is well aligned with EU ENISA’s 
problem description [15, 28], where it is stated that “recent 
deliberate disruptions of critical automation systems prove that 
cyberattacks have a significant impact on critical 
infrastructures and services. Disruption of these ICT 
capabilities may have disastrous consequences for the EU 
Member States’ governments and social wellbeing. The need to 
ensure ICT robustness against cyber-attacks is thus a key 
challenge at national and pan-European level”. 


Acknowledgements 


The research has been partly funded by the Swedish 
Innovation Agency Vinnova’s VinnVäxt Centre, ProcessIT 
Innovations, at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden. The 
authors would like to thank all participants and respondents for 
their time and valuable input. 


References 


[1] Hahn A. (2016). Operational Technology and Information Technology in 
Industrial Control Systems. In: Colbert E., Kott A. (eds) Cyber-security of 
SCADA and Other Industrial Control Systems. Advances in Information 
Security, Vol. 66. Springer, Cham, Switzerland. 


[2] Piggin, R. (2014). Industrial systems: Cyber-security’s new battlefront, 
Engineering & Technology, Septemtber, 2014.  


[3] Mont, O. (2001). Introducing and developing a Product-Service System 
(PSS) concept in Sweden, The International Institute for Industrial 
Environmental Economics (IIIEE), Lund University, Sweden. 


[4] Meier, H., Roy, R. and Seliger, G. (2008). Industrial Product-Service 
Systems – IPS2, CIRP Annals Manufacturing Technology 2008, pp1-24. 


[5] Alonso-Rasgado, T., Thompson, G. and Elfstrom, B-O. (2004). The design 
of functional (total care) products, Journal of Engineering Design, Vol. 15, 
No. 6, pp515-540. 


[6] Lindström, J., Sas, D., Lideskog, H., Löfstrand, M. and Karlsson, L. (2015). 
Defining ‘Functional Products’ through their constituents, International 
Journal of Product Development, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp1-24. 






 John Lindström  et al. / Procedia CIRP 81 (2019) 582–587 587
6 John Lindström et al. / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


[7] Lee, J., Kao, H-A. and Yang, S. (2014). Service innovation and smart 
analytics for Industry 4.0 and big data environment, Procedia CIRP 16, 
pp3-8. 


[8] Cassady, R., Bowden, R. O., Liew, L. and Pohl, E. A. (2000). Combining 
preventive maintenance and statistical process control: a preliminary 
investigation, IIE Transactions, Vol. 32, Iss. 6, pp471-478. 


[9] Lee, J., Ni, J., Djurdjanivic, D., Qiu, H. and Liao, H. (2006). Intelligent 
prognostic tools and e-maintenance, Computers in Industry, 57, pp476-489. 


[10] Deloux, E., Castanier, B. and Bérenguer, C. (2009). Predctive 
maintenance policy for a gradually deteriorating system subject to stress, 
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 94, pp418-431. 


[11] Lindström, J., Kyösti, P., and Delsing, J. (2018). European roadmap for 
industrial process automation. Luleå, Sweden. Available at: 
www.processit.eu/roadmap. Last accessed on 15-Oct-2018. 


[12] Lindström, J., Jonsson, M., Larsson, H., and Lejon, E. (2017). Towards 
intelligent and sustainable production  : combining and integrating online 
predictive maintenance and continuous quality control. Procedia CIRP, 63, 
pp443–448. 


[13] Choudhary, A. K., Harding, J. A. and Tiwari, M. K. (2009). Data mining 
in manufacturing: a review based on the kind of knowledge, Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing, 20, pp501-521. 


[14] EU (2018). The Directive on security of network and information systems 
(NIS Directive). Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/network-and-information-security-nis-directive Last accessed: 
15-Oct-2018. 


[15] EU ENISA (2017). Baseline Security Recommendations for IoT in the 
context of Critical Information Infrastructures, available at: 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/baseline-security-
recommendations-for-iot  Last accessed: 15-Oct-2018. 


[16] (eds) Delsing, J. (2017). IoT Automation – Arrowhead Framework, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA. 


[17] Löfstrand, M., Andrews, J., Karlberg, M. and Karlsson, L. (2011). 
Functional Product system availability: simulation driven design and 


operation through coupled multi-objective optimization, International 
Journal of Product Development, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp119-131. 


[18] Löfstrand, M., Backe, B., Kyösti, P., Lindström, J. and Reed, S. (2012). A 
model for predicting and monitoring industrial system availability, 
International Journal of Product Development, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp140-157. 


[19] Reason, P. & Bradbury, H. (Eds.) (2001). Handbook of action research: 
Participative inquiry and practice, Sage Publications, London, UK. 


[20] Gummesson, E., (2000). Qualitative Methods in Management Research, 
2nd Ed. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA. 


[21] Coghlan, D., Coughlan, P. and Brennan, L. (2004). Organizing for 
research and action: Implementing action research networks, Systemic 
Practice and Action Research, 17(1), pp37–49. 


[22] Remenyi, D. (2013). Field methods for academic research: Interviews, 
focus groups & questionnaires in business and management studies, 3rd 
edition, Academic Conferences and Publishing International Limited, 
Reading, UK. 


[23] Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods, Sage 
Publications, London, UK. 


[24] Kvale, S. and Brinkmann, S. (2009). InterViews: learning the craft of 
qualitative research interviewing, Sage Publications, LA, USA. 


[25] Fontana, A. and Frey, J. (1994). Interviewing, in (eds) Denzin, N. and 
Lincoln, Y., Handbook of qualitative research, Sage Publications, 
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA. 


[26] Miles, M. and Huberman, M. (1994). An expanded sourcebook – 
Qualitative Data Analysis, 2nd ed, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 
USA. 


[27] ISA-95 (2018). ISA-95 standard., available at: www.isa-95.com Last 
accessed: 15-Oct-2018. 


[28] EU ENISA (2018). Recommendations for critical infrastructure and 
services. Avaialble at: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/critical-
information-infrastructures-and-services  Last accessed: 15-Oct-2018. 





 




