









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers & Industrial Engineering


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/caie


Editorial


Special issue: Data-driven decision making in supply chains


1. Introduction


Since regionalization of global economy is becoming a tendency,
supply chains must currently face the competitive challenge of in-
tegrating global value-added networks with more local content.
Actually, industrial policy is currently being used to provoque friction
to global flows and “indigenize” production (Kearney, 2018), which
represents a great challenge when it comes to improving supply chain
fluidity (Cedillo-Campos, Lizarraga-Lizarraga, & Martner-Peyrelongue,
2017). Furthermore, with the growth of international trade, port op-
erations have steadily grown in importance worldwide. However, ex-
pansion and sustainable growth demand modern, higher-capacity in-
frastructure, and environmental awareness (Schulte, González-Ramírez,
Ascencio, & Voß, 2016). For this reason, several contributions in the
literature are focused on proposals that can foster more sustainable
operations based on collaborative schemes (Gonzalez-Feliu, Semet, &
Routhier, 2014; Schulte, Lalla-Ruíz, González-Ramírez, & Voβ, 2017).
On the other hand, and considering the increasing number of elements
related to global uncertainty such as political risk, but also the feasi-
bility to produce some amounts in a cost-effective way, as well as the
fact that customers now tend to prefer local products, industries, and
cultures, we are now facing a new stage in which companies require
more and better data to make supply chain decisions. There is a need
for analytical methods that would be able to process great amount of
data and generate support systems for decision making in different
organizations (Maldonado, González-Ramírez, Quijada, & Ramírez-
Nafarrate, 2019).
Improving decision making in supply chains is a key element to


competitiveness that requires the best data and analysis, especially in
emerging countries (Cedillo-Campos, Morones-Ruelas, Lizarraga-
Lizarraga, Gonzalez-Feliu, & Garza-Reyes, 2017; Fransoo, Blanco, &
Mejia-Argueta, 2017). For example, in the emerging regions there are
important barriers as well as opportunities to achieve world-class effi-
ciencies. Also, there are risks due to factors like market and financial
volatility, dynamic socioeconomic features, security issues, infra-
structural challenges, uncertainty caused by delays and disruptions in
distinct points of the supply chains (e.g., international borders, con-
gested areas) which affect the supply chain dynamics (Cedillo-Campos,
Sanchez, Vadali, Villa, & Menezes, 2014). But on the other hand,
companies could benefit of advantages as qualified human resources at
a lower labor cost, increasing local demand for their products, tax in-
centives, development of infrastructures and resources for specific
purposes, among others. In any case, global companies are constraint to
adapt their original business model to be more resilient and flexible to
local conditions, and at the same time, enrich their competitive ad-
vantages from tailored strategies, customized products and value-added
services based on local environment.


Decision making in supply chains is a critical support of organiza-
tional competitive advantage. It helps coordinating technical, com-
mercial, logistics, and relational capabilities internally and externally
with other stakeholders. However, the transfer of flows among diverse
stakeholders throughout supply chains and with their environment,
forces decision makers to find reliable data to improve their operations.
Hence, any organization must count with updated and good-quality
data to adapt to changes in the business environment, and improve
their capabilities to react more swiftly to requirements imposed by
global-local circumstances. The importance of data-collection techni-
ques and methods when making supply chain decisions is recognized
not only as a strong determinant of competitive advantage for compa-
nies, but also a relevant enabler to boost regional business development
and more sustainable operations (Savy, 2016).
Therefore, methods to understand, analyze reliable data, and im-


prove supply chain decisions based on these data, are key elements to
transform strategic planning into concrete competitive actions across
different supply chain echelons. Currently, means and procedures used
by academics and practitioners to identify and collect the right data and
methods to analyze them remain largely neither mapped nor discussed.
In fact, even if some articles using a large variety of methods to gather
and study data related to decision-making in supply chains were pub-
lished in the past decade, the main stimulating discussion focus was
usually on the results. Consequently, most of them set aside the fun-
damental debate on why the method used was the most suitable option
for the particular case study or the data set under analysis.
Consequently, this Special Issue aims to close the existent gap by se-
lecting significant contributions that use a data-driven supply chain
approach to address specific decision making problems.


2. Overview of selected papers


Seventeen papers were selected based on their technical quality,
originality, and connection with the Call for Papers. The papers were
divided into six categories: (i) Transportation systems; (ii) Inventory
management; (iii) Multi-criteria decision making; (iv) Risk manage-
ment; (v) Sustainability, 4.0 industry, and resilience; (vi) Facilities
planning and design, packing, and warehousing.
First-of-all, three papers in the transportation systems category


present innovative methodological approaches to solve one of the key
issues in supply chain decision making. Second, in the inventory
management category, four papers were selected for their balanced
contribution to better understand why certain methodological ap-
proaches are suitable/limited for a specific supply chain decision-
making contexts. Third, in the multi-criteria decision making approach
two papers propose integrated methods, allowing readers to understand
their empirical application by considering their methodological


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106022


Computers & Industrial Engineering 139 (2020) 106022


Available online 22 August 2019
0360-8352/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03608352

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/caie

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106022

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.cie.2019.106022&domain=pdf




strength and limitations. Fourth, two other papers in the risk manage-
ment category were selected for their approaches used when collecting
and analyzing data. Fifth, in the sustainability, 4.0 industry and resi-
lience category, three papers were selected. A first paper was selected
for its interesting contribution when exploiting the machine learning
techniques to efficiently approximate the optimal management deci-
sions considering a set of uncertainty parameters that continuously
influence the process behavior as an input. A second paper on 4.0 in-
dustry exposes a model for assessing productivity and technical effi-
ciency of the Chilean manufacturing sector. Finally, one interesting
paper from a resilience perspective covers a need by developing a re-
silient integrated production and procurement model considering sus-
tainability and uncertainty in production, supplier, and carrier capa-
cities. Sixth, in the facilities planning and design, packing and
warehousing category, three papers were selected. Thus, based on a
facility location point of view, a stimulating paper uses the data-driven
approach coupled with optimization to address block layout in grocery
stores. A second paper addresses the packing issue based on a mathe-
matical model optimized by Genetic Algorithms, and harmonized with
the Russian theory of problem solving and invention (TRIZ) to design
an export packing of Persian Lime. Finally, from a warehousing per-
spective, a paper was selected for its significant contribution to improve
responsiveness based on a job priority management perspective.
Thus, under the first category, transportation systems, the first


paper proposed by Qiao, Pan and Ballot investigates a less-than-truck-
load (LTL) request pricing and selection problem taking forecasting and
uncertainty of transport requests at the selected destination into con-
sideration. This paper makes an interesting contribution to the devel-
opment of a revenue optimization model for LTL carriers, from a
Physical Internet perspective. At the same time, it contributes to the
development and application of appropriate data-driven methods for
analyzing variations under uncertain scenarios of transportation
market, focusing on data-driven dynamic pricing and revenue optimi-
zation decision making for carriers. The second paper proposed by
Muñuzuri, Onieva, Cortés and Guadix, exposes an IoT system designed
to optimize, manage and monitor container transport operations along
an intermodal corridor, combining rail scheduling and inland vessel
navigation. As the authors proved, this paper identifies stimulating
lessons regarding conventional tracking and tracing systems. At the
same time, based on the proposed system, it provides directions of fu-
ture research to foster smarter and digital supply chains. The third
paper in this category is proposed by Caballero-Morales and Martinez-
Flores, and exposes the critical importance of transportation services
between offshore oil platforms and land facilities as part of emergency
logistics. It is in fact a helicopter routing model with non-deterministic
failure rate for the evacuation of multiple oil platforms in Mexico. This
paper contributes to the discussion about what quantitative/qualitative
methodological approaches should be used when collecting and ana-
lyzing data from real-life environments. Their contribution allows to
better understand why certain methodological approaches are suitable/
limited for a specific supply chain decision-making contexts. The model
integrates a non-deterministic failure rate as function of the helicopters
cumulative traveled distance/time, and at the same time, due to the
complexity of the transportation task, it uses a Bayesian approach to
generate instances for accurate testing, as well as an evolutionary meta-
heuristic to provide suitable solutions for large instances. Since in lo-
gistics reliability is one of the key competitiveness factors, this con-
tribution can be extended to other logistic areas where reliable route
planning is required in the presence of failure risks associated to the
vehicles used for the transportation chain.
As part of the second category, inventory management, the first


paper proposed by Cárdenas-Barrón, Shaikh, and Treviño-Garza deals
with an economic order quantity (EOQ) inventory model under both
nonlinear stock dependent on demand and nonlinear holding cost.
Authors develop an inventory model from a retailer's perspective,
where the supplier offers a trade credit period to the retailer. Authors


argue that today and more than ever, due to a growing intensity of
inter-organizational flows (physical, informational, and financial), and
diversity of markets, supply chain management is facing issues such as
inventory management, trade credit and customer satisfaction. Thus,
they deliver two models to determine the optimal ordering quantity and
the ending inventory level, which maximizes the retailer's total profit
per unit time. Thus, authors argue their methodological contribution is
suitable for a specific supply chain decision-making contexts where
nonlinear stock holding cost, non-linear demand and trade credit are
involved. The second paper in this category is delivered by Tiwari,
Cárdenas-Barrón, Shaikh, and Goh under the title of: “Retailer's optimal
ordering policy for deteriorating items under order-size dependent trade
credit and complete backlogging”. Authors address the significant issue
related to the fact that retail inventory management literature usually
accepts that suppliers look for stimulating demand by proposing to
retailers a delay in payments, but in practice, suppliers are more likely
to suggest to retailers a partial delay in payments. Therefore, authors
deliver theoretical results when determining the optimal replenishment
time and the length of time for the stock to draw down completely.
Thus, based on these time values, the retailer’s optimal ordering
quantity and backlogging policies are calculated for reducing the total
inventory cost per unit of time. The third paper on this category was
developed by Mehdizadeh who uses the case of auto spare parts in Iran.
He argues that a lack of data reliability not only affects the real levels of
demand numbers but also, consequently, the demand forecasting and
ordering supply chain decisions. One of the advantages of the proposed
methodological approach is its capability to capture the dynamic be-
havior (influenced by the mileage of the cars in the planning horizon) of
the retailer when placing orders to the distributor. This interesting data-
driven approach leaves open the analysis faced by decision makers
when deciding to invest in sensors or/and self-learning algorithms and
advanced hybrid data-optimization approaches for getting more reli-
able information in real-time as well as better tools to support decision
making process. Finally, in this category, Goodarzi and Saen present an
interesting contribution, which engages the always theoretically inter-
esting and practically important discussion on how to reduce the bull-
whip effect (BWE) from a network perspective. As authors argue,
usually BWE is analyzed based on the standard perspective of series or
parallel supply chains structures. For this, authors propose the use of
network data envelopment analysis (NDEA) to provide a network
worst-practice frontier of slacks-based measure (SBM) model in pre-
sence of undesirable factors for measuring the relative BWE of non-
serial supply chain networks (SCNs). As a result, based on a pharma-
ceutical industry case study, it is possible to identify the worst non-
serial SCNs and their worst members in terms of BWE. Thus, supply
chain decision makers can recognize inefficient partners, and then,
improve operations. Authors allow to focus on another suitable aspect
when looking for fostering smarter and digital supply chains.
Under the third category, multi-criteria decision-making, DeCastro-


Vivas, OSantÁnna, Esquerre, and Freires, based on a Brazilian oil and
gas company, propose a method combining analytical and mathema-
tical models for evaluating and optimizing sustainable supply chains.
Thus, authors use the analytical hierarchy process (AHP) and pre-
ference ranking organization method for enrichment evaluations
(PROMETHEE). At the same time, a preemptive goal programming is
used. Thus, this paper provides a stimulating approach to evaluate
supply chain sustainability by allowing decision-makers the use of key
performance indicators. On the other hand, Cheng, Peng, Gu, Liu, Yang,
Zhou, and Huang present a supplier evaluation model based on a sup-
port vector regression. As authors argue, expert experience is one of the
most important bases when evaluating supplier performance in global
supply chains. To improve this process, authors use a data-driven
support vector regression (SVR) combined with a genetic programming
(GP). A contribution that allows a better understanding about how
novel methodological approaches or combination of them are suitable
for a specific complex supply chain decision making contexts.


Editorial Computers & Industrial Engineering 139 (2020) 106022


2






In the fourth category, risk management, Kara, Oktay-Firat, and
Ghadge deliver a paper in which authors address the identification,
assessment, and mitigation of different type of risks in supply chains
based on a data mining-based framework. For this, looking for a holistic
approach, authors used a case study to test their data driven con-
tribution. Thus, for the framework validity, a case study based on a
series of semi-structured interviews, discussions, and a focus group is
used. Since the model was tested using a single case company, the
applicability, lessons, and limitations of the framework are difficult to
generalize. However, this paper provides a significant contribution to
foster smart supply chains running operations under complex context.
The second paper on this matter is delivered by Qazi, Akhtar, and
Wieland. The authors introduce an innovative risk management process
analysis, namely risk matrix driven supply chain risk management
(RMSCRM). For this, they adapt risk matrix based tools for modeling
interdependent risks and risk appetite. Thus, instead of modeling and
managing supply chain risks from a separated approach, authors pro-
pose the idea of modeling and managing a network of risks. It appears
as a way to be useful for practitioners by looking for an improved real-
life use for data-driven decision making in supply chains.
Under the fifth category, sustainability, 4.0 industry and resilience,


Medina-González, Shokry, Silvente, Lupera, and Espuña provide a
paper in which they address the optimal management of a multi-ob-
jective bio-based energy supply chain network exposed to multiple
sources of uncertainty. Indeed, complexity to achieve an optimal result
using typical uncertainty management methods dramatically increases
with the number of uncertainty factors measured. The results show a
data-driven model that predicts the optimal decisions with important
accuracy, time efficiency, and flexibility to simultaneously handle
several uncertainty sources disregarding their distributions. From a 4.0
industry, De la Fuente-Mella, Rojas-Fuentes, and Leiva deliver an
econometric model for assessing productivity and technical efficiency
of the Chilean manufacturing sector. The results shown by the authors
proved that for both the standard model and the proposed factorial
model, the economic theory is validated in terms of the importance of
the inputs that form the manufacturing outputs. Under that context,
authors identify stimulating lessons and recommendations to foster
smarter and digital supply chains. Finally, in this category, Kaur, Singh,
Garza-Reyes, Mishra present a paper that from a resilience perspective,
offers an independent and integrated production and procurement
model considering sustainability and uncertainty for resilient supply
chains. In fact, authors proved that data driven integrated production
and procurement model is more efficient than traditional (independent)
models in terms of profit generation and resource management. This
represents an interesting contribution when considering specific
methods and their empirical application to real-life resilience chal-
lenges.
In the sixth category, facilities planning and design, packing and


warehousing category, Ozgormus and Smith expose a paper based on a
data-driven approach coupled with optimization techniques to address
the block layout problem in grocery stores. It was based on a case study
in which participates Migros, the largest retailer in Turkey. The re-
search is focused on end-user portion of supply chain purchases in su-
permarkets. The methodology employed was a Tabu Search meta-
heuristic and the results were validated by simulation. The authors also
used data mining to infer the correlations among products bought and
to estimate their propensity for impulse purchases. The proposed
methodology can be combined with emerging technologies like sensors
on where the carts go through the store as the customer shops for data
gathering. An interesting contribution that is susceptible to integrate in
the future to the approach proposed by the authors is the use of
emerging approaches such as social network methods, and self-learning
algorithms. The second paper, delivered by Aguilar-Lasserre, Torres-
Sánchez, Fernández-Lambert, Azzaro-Pantel, Cortes-Robles, and Román
del Valle, addresses the design of an export packing of a fresh fruit
problem based on the case of the Persian lime. The authors propose a


methodology based on a multi-objective mathematical model (with
functional elements of non-spatial type) that is solved by a genetic al-
gorithm. The proposed approach is harmonized with the Russian theory
of problem solving and invention (TRIZ). They aim to optimize the
spaces of the packing, maximize the resistance to vertical compression,
and minimize the amount of material used. As a strength of their pro-
posal, we can highlight the replicability of their proposed framework to
design the packing of any other export product, either another fresh-
produce or even other type of products. They are also considering the
airflow and friction of the product inside the packing. Another im-
portant element is that the proposed design takes into consideration the
regulations of three international markets for the design of the packing.
As a limitation of the study, we can mention that the authors are con-
sidering only paperboard in the design and have not considered any
compostable and/or biodegradable materials. This is proposed as a
further research avenue. The proposed methodology can be suitable for
analyzing variations in terms of the regulations of the international
markets that may require other conditions for the packing. In terms of
supply chain fluidity, the specific decision problem presented by the
authors is not related to the flow of products along the supply chain and
the interconnection to other echelons, as it is dealing with a packing
design problem. In terms of challenges faced by decision makers in
front of emerging technologies in data gathering, the decision problem
is related to packing design, so it is not so related to data gathering or
decision-making along a supply chain. But it could be more related to
the introduction of new materials and new packing and transportation
alternatives for fresh products. Finally, Kim presents a stimulating
paper for improving warehouse responsiveness. The author proposes to
schedule jobs more efficiently to meet compressed response times.
Thus, this paper provides a data-driven decision-making methodology
to achieve a right implementation when practitioners decide to imple-
ment it. The author proposes a stochastic simulation model to address
the uncertainty of the task requests in a warehouse. It also contributes
to the fluidity of the supply chain by assisting decision makers in the job
scheduling process and reducing the response times by prioritizing each
job. The performance of each scheduling rule is evaluated in terms of a
joint cost criterion that integrates the objectives of low earliness, low
tardiness, low labor idleness, and low work-in-process stocks. This is an
interesting contribution when looking for improving supply chain
fluidity based on data. Thanks to this paper, readers would identify
stimulating lessons and directions of future research to foster smarter
and digital supply chains.
Even though the use of technologies is an increasing part of data-


driven decision making in supply chains, the effective implementation
of decisions in the organizations is still greatly linked to the skills of
human resources. In fact, decision makers as well as researchers are
facing a growing complexity related to the introduction of emerging
technologies providing a great amount of data. It is under this context
that it is critical to know what quantitative/qualitative methodological
approaches are the best when collecting and analyzing data, as well as
why a defined methodological approach is suitable/limited for the
specific supply chain decision making context. The two are critical
competences when looking for smarter and digital supply chains. As the
challenge derived from the supply chain complexity is at the same time
an opportunity to create new theoretical paradigms and technologies,
this Special Issue attempts to be a bibliographic reference because of
the different approaches, methodologies, technologies, and cases it
exposes. This Special Issue pretends to motivate the development of
tailor-made theoretical contributions that increase the body of knowl-
edge about Data-driven Decision Making in Supply Chains, and prac-
tical solutions that contribute to create new technologies and practices.


References


Cedillo-Campos, M., Lizarraga-Lizarraga, G., & Martner-Peyrelongue, C. (2017). MiF3
method: Modeling intermodal fluidity freight flows. Research in Transportation


Editorial Computers & Industrial Engineering 139 (2020) 106022


3



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0005




Economics, 61, 15–24.
Cedillo-Campos, M., Morones-Ruelas, D., Lizarraga-Lizarraga, G., Gonzalez-Feliu, J., &


Garza-Reyes, J. (2017). Decision policy scenarios for just-in-sequence deliveries.
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, 10(4), 1–23.


Cedillo-Campos, M., Sanchez, C., Vadali, S., Villa, J., & Menezes, M. (2014). Supply chain
dynamics and the “cross-border effect”: The U.S.–Mexican border’s case. Computers
and Industrial Engineering, 72(June), 261–273.


Fransoo, J., Blanco, E., & Mejia-Argueta, C. (2017). 50 Million Nanostores: Retail dis-
tribution in emerging megacities. Edición Kindle.


Gonzalez-Feliu, J., Semet, F., & Routhier, J.-L. (2014). Sustainable urban logistics: Concepts,
methods and information systems. EcoProduction. Springer.


Kearney, A. T. (2018). Competing in an age of multi-localism. Washington, D.C.: Global
Business Policy Council.


Maldonado, S., González-Ramírez, R. G., Quijada, F., & Ramírez-Nafarrate, A. (2019).
Analytics meets port logistics: A decision support system for container stacking op-
erations. Decision Support Systems pp. 121, 84–93.


Savy, M. (2016). Logistics as a political issue. Transport Reviews, 36(4), 413–417.
Schulte, F., González-Ramírez, R. G., Ascencio, L. M., & Voß, S. (2016). Directions for


sustainable port in Latin America and the Caribbean. International Journal of Transport
Economics, 43(3), 315–337.


Schulte, F., Lalla-Ruíz, E., González-Ramírez, R. G., & Voβ, S. (2017). Reducing port-


related empty trip truck emissions: A mathematical approach for truck appointments
with collaboration. Transportation Research Part E, 105, 195–212.


Miguel Gaston Cedillo-Camposa,⁎, Rosa G. González-Ramírezb,
Christopher Mejía-Arguetac, Jesús González-Feliud


aMexican Institute of Transportation (IMT), National Laboratory for
Transportation Systems and Logistics, Carretera Queretaro-Galindo Km 12,


C.P.76703, Sanfandila, Mpio. Pedro Escobedo, Mexico
bUniversidad de los Andes, Mons. Álvaro del Portillo 12.455, Las Condes,


Santiago, Chile
cMassachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Center for Transportation


and Logistics, MIT E40, Floor 2, 1 Amherst Street, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA


d Ecole des Mines de Saint-Etienne, Institut Henri Fayol, Environnement,
Ville et Société, France


E-mail address: gaston.cedillo@imt.mx (M.G. Cedillo-Campos).


⁎ Corresponding author.


Editorial Computers & Industrial Engineering 139 (2020) 106022


4



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30481-4/h0050

mailto:gaston.cedillo@imt.mx


