









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664


2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2021.
10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.231


10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.231 2351-9789


© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2021.





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000   


     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 














2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)                                                                                                                                            
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


30th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2020) 
15-18 June 2020, Athens, Greece. 


How to use lean manufacturing for improving a Healthcare logistics 
performance 


Dossou, Paul-Erica,b*, Pereira Rafaela, Salama Cristianea, Chang Junior Joao 4c 
aIcam site of Paris-Sénart, 34 Point de vue,77127 Lieusaint, France 


bUniversity Gustave Eiffel/AME/SPLOTT, 14-20, Boulevard Newton, 77420, Champs-Sur-Marne, France 
c FEI University, Sao Bernardo, Brazil  


   
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33181141043;  E-mail address: paul-eric.dossou@icam.fr 


Abstract 


Most companies in the world are focused on their global performance for being competitive on the market. Lean manufacturing is one of the 
main methodologies used by them for increasing their supply chain and logistics performance. Indeed, Logistics performance improvement 
implies the definition of KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) for measuring at each transformation level, the evolution of the logistics system. 
Thus, Industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts are defined for implementing new technologies, tools and organizations in companies in order to 
define their future. A new framework, based on lean manufacturing and DMAIC methodologies, with sustainability as its kernel has been 
developed in Icam, A Higher education school, for SMEs. In addition, European population is growing older day by day and they are regularly 
visiting hospitals. In this context, the treatment of patients in good conditions (quality, cost and lead time) is necessary as much as the hospital 
global performance. In this frame, a project is ongoing between FEI, a Brazilian University and Icam for defining and implementing Healthcare 
Logistics 4.0 (including lean manufacturing).  
 
This paper presents concepts, methods and tools of healthcare logistics 4.0 for improving a hospital performance. Examples on medicines 
tracking, medicine and food dispatching will be given as result and detailed for illustrating concepts presented.  
 
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


 Keywords: lean manufacturing, serialization, performance improvement 


 
1. Introduction 


Due to globalization, concurrence and competitiveness are 
actually important for companies in Europe. SMEs are mostly 
concerned because of the low level of task force cost in Asian 
continent. This necessity of performance optimization is 
required in all sectors. For instance, Europe consumption in 
optical, mobile, manufacturing or pharmaceutics products is 
highly impacted by the Chinese crisis on corona virus. Then, 
for being competitive SMEs have to improve their 


performance. Lean manufacturing methodology is able to 
transform these companies. In addition, the use on industry 
4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts specially will help them to be 
more competitive. Icam, a Higher educational school develop 
a framework with sustainability as the kernel of company 
future transformation in order to take into account SME 
expectations and in the same time including advantages of 
industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts implementation such as 
new technologies, tools and organizations. 





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000   


     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 














2351-9789 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)                                                                                                                                            
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


30th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2020) 
15-18 June 2020, Athens, Greece. 


How to use lean manufacturing for improving a Healthcare logistics 
performance 


Dossou, Paul-Erica,b*, Pereira Rafaela, Salama Cristianea, Chang Junior Joao 4c 
aIcam site of Paris-Sénart, 34 Point de vue,77127 Lieusaint, France 


bUniversity Gustave Eiffel/AME/SPLOTT, 14-20, Boulevard Newton, 77420, Champs-Sur-Marne, France 
c FEI University, Sao Bernardo, Brazil  


   
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33181141043;  E-mail address: paul-eric.dossou@icam.fr 


Abstract 


Most companies in the world are focused on their global performance for being competitive on the market. Lean manufacturing is one of the 
main methodologies used by them for increasing their supply chain and logistics performance. Indeed, Logistics performance improvement 
implies the definition of KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) for measuring at each transformation level, the evolution of the logistics system. 
Thus, Industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts are defined for implementing new technologies, tools and organizations in companies in order to 
define their future. A new framework, based on lean manufacturing and DMAIC methodologies, with sustainability as its kernel has been 
developed in Icam, A Higher education school, for SMEs. In addition, European population is growing older day by day and they are regularly 
visiting hospitals. In this context, the treatment of patients in good conditions (quality, cost and lead time) is necessary as much as the hospital 
global performance. In this frame, a project is ongoing between FEI, a Brazilian University and Icam for defining and implementing Healthcare 
Logistics 4.0 (including lean manufacturing).  
 
This paper presents concepts, methods and tools of healthcare logistics 4.0 for improving a hospital performance. Examples on medicines 
tracking, medicine and food dispatching will be given as result and detailed for illustrating concepts presented.  
 
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the FAIM 2020. 


 Keywords: lean manufacturing, serialization, performance improvement 


 
1. Introduction 


Due to globalization, concurrence and competitiveness are 
actually important for companies in Europe. SMEs are mostly 
concerned because of the low level of task force cost in Asian 
continent. This necessity of performance optimization is 
required in all sectors. For instance, Europe consumption in 
optical, mobile, manufacturing or pharmaceutics products is 
highly impacted by the Chinese crisis on corona virus. Then, 
for being competitive SMEs have to improve their 


performance. Lean manufacturing methodology is able to 
transform these companies. In addition, the use on industry 
4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts specially will help them to be 
more competitive. Icam, a Higher educational school develop 
a framework with sustainability as the kernel of company 
future transformation in order to take into account SME 
expectations and in the same time including advantages of 
industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts implementation such as 
new technologies, tools and organizations. 



http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.promfg.2020.10.231&domain=pdf




1658 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664
2 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2020) 000–000 


This paper proposes to use these concepts and 
methodology for solving technological, economical and 
organization problems in hospitals. Indeed, European 
hospitals have to improve their performance because the 
population is being older and have regularly to stay in 
hospitals. For instance, patient conditions, medicines 
procurement and dispatching, medicines tracking, patient 
flows, bedrooms and beds management, or food management   
have to be optimized.   


After a literature review, this paper will focus on how lean 
manufacturing and healthcare logistics 4.0 concepts, methods 
and tools being developed by Icam and FEI university 
(Brazilian university) could improve healthcare performance. 
Then, examples based on medicines tracking, medicines and 
foods dispatching will be detailed.   


2. Literature review 


Lean manufacturing and Industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 
concepts are based on theory of systems, and in this frame, a 
company could be considered as a system. The idea of this 
project is to adapt the pervious concepts to healthcare 
logistics. This chapter presents the concepts and methods of 
the literature, required for elaborating the global methodology 
for improving healthcare performance. Indeed, lean 
manufacturing and mudas, Industry4.0 and logistics 4.0, value 
Stream Mapping and artificial intelligence will be exposed. 


2.1.  Lean Manufacturing  


Lean Manufacturing is a methodology based on the 
elimination of all non-value added in the supply chain. It was 
developed by Taiichi Ohno, executive of Toyota in the 1950s 
in Japan (after World War II). Lean is based on eliminating 
waste in the process, based on understanding customer needs. 
It is a management philosophy that seeks to reduce waste and 
increase productivity and quality as presented in [1]. 


This methodology is used in companies that are always 
looking for continuous improvement, cost reduction, 
production agility, increase in productive capacity and 
improvements in the working environment for its civil 
servants as shown in [2]. 





Fig. 1. Lean manufacturing house 


 
This methodology defines seven main points of waste (the 


seven mudas) and makes it possible to implement the tools to 
reduce them. The seven wastes are as detailed in [2, 3]: 
• Overproduction: producing more than the demand 


demanded, the consequence is the loss of profit compared 
to products which are not sold and the loss of storage 
space. The production schedule must be adjusted on 
demand. 


• Over-storage: accumulating raw materials and products, it 
is said to be wasteful for overstocking, because these 
stored products cause unnecessary expenditure. We have to 
balance production and demand. 


• Unnecessary displacements: losses for unnecessary 
displacements happen when the products are transported in 
an unscheduled, useless way or from inadequate systems. 
We need to improve production layouts to reduce losses. 


• Unnecessary treatments: losses for unnecessary 
treatments concern the unnecessary stages of the 
production process which can be eliminated without 
compromising the product. It takes in-depth process 
analysis to work on real needs. 


• Unnecessary movements: errors in orientation in the 
execution or poor distribution of tasks and the lack of study 
of the parameters in relation to the times of execution of 
activities can cause unnecessary movements of officials in 
the production processes. To resolve this type of loss, it is 
necessary to plan the appropriate schedule and work logic, 
then determine an average time for the execution of each 
step and eliminate unnecessary steps in the process. 


• Errors: when the product is outside the standards required 
for sale, there is a waste by mistake. This causes a waste of 
financial resources and the possibility of cost overruns for 
repair. This can be caused by the poor quality of 
equipment, the low qualification of employees or tools 
outside the standard. 


• And waiting times: loss by waiting time corresponds to 
time lost (waiting) between one step and the next and 
which is caused by a queue in front of the production 
station (products to be finalized). This can be caused by 
large time gaps between processes and is one of the most 
wasteful mudas. However, this can be remedied by 
analyzing and finding a balance in each process. 
 
Value Stream Mapping (VSM) is a Lean Manufacturing 


tool that brings together all the value added and non-value-
added actions that bring a product from an initial state to a 
final state. This tool aims to work on a whole and not a part: 
on a production line, the VSM does not attack a machine of 
the line in particular but the whole line as shown in [4]. Its 
goal is to take a photo of the manufacturing actual 
organization. That means, the elaboration of an existing 
system cartography. This photo could be analyzed for 
detecting inconsistencies (non-added values) and describing 
added values. Then, a future system could be elaborated based 
on VSM concepts (Takt time, pacemaker, interval, 
supermarket, FIFO, etc.) 
 


Stability (Robustness)


5S Kaizen(Continual improvement)


Heijunka
(Production 
leveling)


Standard 
working


Takt time
Pull flow


Human 
Machine 


Separation


JidokaJIT
(Act on


abnormality)
(Just in Time)


Costs


Quality


Delivery time


LEAN
MANUFACTURING






 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664 1659
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000  3 


Lean manufacturing methodology could be used on 
Healthcare logistics for solving problems and improving its 
global performance by exploiting concepts presented above. 
Indeed, different hospital sectors are concerned in this 
transformation, but also call for their resolution to transversal 
knowledge involving several disciplines, concepts, methods 
and tools. The transformations for obtaining the future system 
needs to use industry 4.0 concepts.  


2.2. Industry 4.0 and logisitics 4.0   


Industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts were developed in 
German, and then in France for helping German and French 
company to improve their performance, even if they have a 
disadvantage of high taskforce cost.  Many researchers have 
worked on this topic and concepts for defining different 
frameworks. But most of them are focused on new 
technologies as the kernel of industry 4.0. For instance, in [5], 
the paradigm of industry 4.0 is outlined around three 
dimensions:  
• The horizontal integration across the value creation 


network, 
• The end-to-end engineering across the product life cycle, 
• And the vertical integration combined with networked 


manufacturing systems 
Then Micro and macro perspectives presented are based on 


organizational and technological aspects. Thus, advantages 
and objectives of industry 4.0 are focused on digitalization, 
new technologies as presented in [6]: Cyber-physical systems, 
big data, real time data management, ICT, Internet of Things, 
Distributed and decentralized control, RFID, etc. The concept 
of smart factory, and smart manufacturing is developed in 
detail in this context [7]. Economic aspects are also developed 
in [8] for presenting processes used for improving company 
global performance in terms of cost reduction and turnover 
increasing 


2.3. Artificial Intelligence  


Artificial intelligence is a big and complex structure that 
has plenty of diversified branches of studies. As described in 
[9] there is a significant enthusiasm for Artificial intelligence 
regarding its potential, based on machine learning and deep 
learning. Indeed, Machine learning is used for developing 
new algorithms that can automatically make decisions by 
relying on patterns and inferences, without requiring any 
explicit instructions. This family could be divided into 
supervised algorithms requiring availability of labelled data 
from which to learn and unsupervised algorithms based on 
similarities patterns and differences without any prior 
information. As presented in [10], the fundamental principle 
of machine learning is the ability of a computer to improve 
upon its own capabilities by continuously analyzing its 
interactions with the real world.  The Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) is used for analyzing the human language 
and helping a machine to understand, interpret and manipulate 
human language.  


Deep learning is the comeback of Artificial Neural 
Networks as explained in [11]. For instance, in 2015 Alphago, 


a program developed by Google, was able to beat the 
champion in the board game go by using deep learning. This 
concept is used for image or speech recognitions. As detailed 
in [12], deep learning approaches are able to work on 
processing data in their raw and eliminate the need of hand-
crafted features. These approaches are used on semantic 
segmentation of images and are easy to use because of faster 
central processing units (CPUs) and graphic processing units 
(GPUs). Even if these concepts are interesting and efficient, 
machine learning concepts are adapted for being used for 
developing a user interface in order to facilitate interaction 
between a decision aided tool and a user. 


In addition, it will be easier to combine machine learning 
with expert system approaches developed as exposed in [13] 
and shown in Fig. 2. The expert system is viewed as a method 
that can provide the expert-level diagnosis knowledge to solve 
the diagnosis tasks of machines instead of huge human labor.  





 
Fig. 2. Architecture of an expert system for diagnosis 


The following chapter will show the architecture of the 
decision aided tool being developed in Icam for supporting 
the healthcare logistics 4.0 concepts implementation in 
addition to the global methodology presentation.   


3. Global Methodology and tool 


3.1. Methodology 


The framework elaborated in Icam for implementing 
industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts in SMEs, in opposition 
to many architectures of the literature, considers sustainability 
as the kernel of industry 4.0 concepts implementation in 
SMEs. As shown in Fig. 3, new technologies (RFID, IoT, 
Robots, Cobots, etc.) & tools (WMS, ERP, MES, etc.) are 
important for increasing the company performance, and 
represent one industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 implementation 
axis. New organization (Blockchain, etc.) and flexibility & 
changes management represent the second one. But 
sustainability entirely defined by environmental, social and 
societal aspects is the center of the company transformation in 
order to increase the company performance.  


Each sub-system of the SME will be studied, and its 
performance increased continuously by respecting the 
company expectations and objectives but also industry 4.0 and 
logistics 4.0 concepts. At each step of the framework 


User interface


Dynamic 
database


Knowledge 
base


Explanation 
system


Inference 
engines


Problem
definition


Collected
data


Diagnosis results


Response Explanation


Consultation
Consultation


Health
information


Reasoning
knowledge


Decision
knowledge


Expert
knowledge






1660 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664
4 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2020) 000–000 


utilization, the loop elaborated around sustainability will 
continuously be used. Healthcare Logistics 4.0 corresponds to 
the adaptation of these concepts to the hospital. The hospital 
in this case is considered as a system and for increasing its 
performance, rules defined in the frame of SMEs sectors 
could be used. Then, for supporting this global methodology 
based on lean manufacturing and industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 
concepts, a specific software tool is being developed.  





 
Fig.3. Framework for industry 4.0 and logistics concepts implementation in 
SMEs 


3.2. The architecture of the decision aided tool 


The Fig. 4, presents the architecture of the tool in 
development. This tool is required for managing all data 
acquired during a hospital evolution, to offering to a hospital 
best changes suggestion, to manage to enrich the 
transformation processes by capitalizing existing case and 
reuse the as an aid for new transformations.  
 


 
Fig.4. Architecture of a decision aided tool for supporting healthcare logistics 
4.0 


3.2.1.  Learning System 
 


As explained above, the algorithms of machine learning 
can be divided in two different main groups, being them the 
supervised-learning and the unsupervised-learning and their 
difference is on the use of explicit feedback in the learning 
process. Still following their work, the algorithms of the 
supervised-learning are those that receive a complete base of 
data, with indications, meaning that it uses predefined input-
output pairs to works out what is an input and what is an 
output. In addition, in the case of unsupervised-learning, data 


received are a raw, not categorized and not in a database. It 
will create its own categories and characteristics. Then, there 
is no predefined input the algorithm will learn to detect 
patterns.  


Both concepts are used in the learning module for 
characterizing, interpreting all information and integrating in 
order to solve stock problems.  


Indeed, all information that the system will receive related 
the hospital logistics will be decoded and processed adapted 
solutions will be defined. But also, all unknown information 
(not in the database) will be treated for aiding the user. For 
instance, stock management, the input could be the quantity of 
medicines in the stock (stock level) according the order 
threshold, and the output would be next medicines 
procurement planning.  


3.2.2. Stock Optimizer 
This module contains stock optimization algorithms 


(operational research). In this module, all information 
(supervised and not supervised) will be exploited for finding 
the optimized solution. Then, it can reach to a history of 
decisions already made (in other times) to create a pattern and 
from that keep making the new decision. The predefined 
input-output pairs will be stored and the new elaborated.  


3.2.3.  User Interface 
The user interface is used for relating the tool being 


developed with the user. It has to be able to acquire user 
expectations and interpreted them in order to define the good 
response. But also, it has also to be able to give to the user 
solutions and instructions for implementation.  For instance, 
patient information could be entered there, and right solution 
for the patient management will be defined and transmitted to 
hospital workers.  


3.2.4. Inference Motor 
An inference motor is used for elaborating deductive 


reasonings. It is the place for conducting logical ratiocination 
and designing responses from the knowledge base and facts. It 
is the heart of the expert system, because facts and rules bases 
end up communicating and become extremely important for 
analyzing and solving problems.  


3.2.5. Tool Manager 
The tool manager is exploited for managing each module 


of the system. It creates interaction with each part and 
participated to the efficiency of the system. This tool will 
uniformly organize all data and integrate (or extract) them in 
the system, storing them in a database  
 


3.2.6. Expert Knowledge and Knowledge base 


3.2.6.1. The expert knowledge module 
The expert knowledge module is used for acquired in real 


time expert knowledge. This explicit or implicit knowledge 
could be transformed into rules or facts for the knowledge 
base. This module will allow to make interviews of workers, 
or to exploit knowledge of lean manufacturing and industry 


INFERENCE MOTOR


USER INTERFACE


MEASURES


THEORIC 
MODEL


EXPERT 
KNOWLEDGE


RULE 
BASE


INITIAL 
FACTS


INFERED 
FACTS


FACT BASE


KNOWLEDGE BASE


TOOL MANAGER


CASE BASE


CAPITALISATION 
SYSTEM


CBR 
Manager


NEW CASE 
BASE


EXISTING 
SYSTEM


WORKSPACE


STOCK OPTIMISER
CALCULATOR 


AND 
EVALUATOR


LEARNING SYSTEM


USER


EXPERT






 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664 1661
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000  5 


4.0 and logistics 4.0 implementation specialists. The module 
is also connected to the learning system for giving to this 
system information that would be interpreted and treated.  


3.2.6.2. Knowledge base 
The knowledge module contains rules and facts required in 


the healthcare domain. It is a specific expert knowledge, with 
a defined, precise and known knowledge and that could be 
directly exploited through the inference module for solving 
healthcare problems. It contains rules adapted to lean 
manufacturing and industry 4.0 and logistics 4.0 concepts 
implementation, but also specific hospital characteristics. 


3.2.7.  Capitalization System 
 


The capitalization system contains old cases treated. The 
idea is to make them able to be used as reference models 
during the study and the transformation of a new hospital. It is 
based on Case-Based Reasoning and the adapted and similar 
old case would be extracted during a new study. The 
exploitation of experimentations and transformations in other 
hospital is a good opportunity. 


3.2.8. The existing system 
 


This module is used for modelling the actual organization 
of the hospital being transformed and make him able to be 
analyzed and transformed by the decision aided tool.   


4. Illustrations 


4.1. Tracking case 


The Indoor Pharmacy (PUI) of one French hospital of Ile 
de France region must set up a serialization system to control 
medicines and make traceability.  


The first motivation is to avoid patients being treated with 
counterfeit medicines. The second motivation is to comply 
with the new standard which requires all suppliers of drugs to 
set up two mandatory security devices, an anti-intrusion 
device and a serialization system (an identifier corresponding 
to a serial number), starting from February 9, 2019 (as 
presented in Fig. 5).  








Fig.5.  Diagram of serialization's process 


The main challenges of this subject are that some 
laboratories are not fully regulated (some of their boxes do 
not have the SN code or some of their medicines cannot be 
serialized). This new added step will require more time for 
storekeepers who will have to balance their work routines. 


First existing technologies have to be explored to find a 
solution that will automate the reading of bar codes (the codes 
that are in the boxes) and then the objective is to propose a 
solution adapted to the architectural layout and the constraints 
of the interior reception area of the pharmacy to perform the 
serialization operation. 


The process time before the modifications is 2 minutes, 
this time has been timed during a visit, the process 
corresponds to the time of: the reception, the verification of 
the delivery (the storekeeper checks the name of the 
laboratory on the delivery slip , conformity of the address, 
number of packages), physical verification of the packages 
(integrity inspection and also the control of the correct 
delivery address), acceptance of receipt (of that there is a 
concordance between the voucher and the physical integrity 
of the box, the storekeeper accepts it), the validation of the 
receipt (the traceability of the receipt is made by sticking a 
label on the delivery slip), the control of the receipt (a 
preparer ensures that: there is a concordance between the 
purchase order and the delivery slip, the quantity ordered is 
received, it is indeed the product ordered), the opening of the 
carton (the carton is opened and the boxes of drugs comes 
out), the computer reception (step where the entry of the drugs 
in the computer stock is made) and finally the storage of the 
drugs.  


This actual situation was modeled by using Flexsim, a 
simulation tool for representing flows from medicines 
reception to transfer in storage. Fig. 6 shows the result a 
graphical modelling with this tool. The advantage is that from 
this existing system simulation, scenarios could be studied by 
changing parameters. The good solution would be found by 
testing scenarios.  


 
Fig.6. Simulation of the existing system 


The main objective is to set up a new system but in a more 
automated way where time will not be changed since a new 
stage will be added, serialization. 


 
On February 9, 2019, European rules relating to the fight 


against falsification of medicinal products for human use will 
be applied. 


The European directive on the serialization of medicines 
2011/62 of June 8, 2011, known as "Falsified medicines", 


Serialization


Program


Medicines 
arrived


Scan the 
boxes Security


Workers


Good 
medicines


Bad 
medicines


Mobile toolFixed tool






1662 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664
6 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2020) 000–000 


indeed provides for the measures to be put in place to secure 
the distribution chain of the medicine in the European Union. 
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 specifies all the 
provisions of this directive. 


These rules are based on the establishment of an anti-
intrusion and authentication device to be affixed to the 
packaging of prescription drugs. 


Concretely, this means that each box of prescription drugs 
must have a serial number, loaded into a data storage system. 


To set up this so-called traceability system, the delegated 
regulation provides for the establishment of a governance 
body at European level (called EMVO, European Medicine 
Verification Organization) and in each member state (NMVO, 
National Medicine Verification Organization), responsible for 
managing, respectively, the system at European level (called 
EMVS European Medicine Verification System) and that of 
each member state (NMVS, National Medicine Verification 
System). 


In order for France to comply with European regulations 
on February 9, 2019, the development and implementation of 
this system in France has already started. 


The industrial representatives (LEEM, GEMME, LEMI) 
decided to entrust the implementation of the Delegated 
Regulations to the CIP (Club Inter Pharmaceutique), within 
which was created, in accordance with the provisions of 
European legislation, governance, France MVO ( France 
Medicine Verification Organization) whose responsibility is 
to set up, administer and ensure the security of stored data and 
operate the French verification system called France MVS. 


The consequences of the implementation of this regulation 
for manufacturers are as follows: 
• Affixing authentication and burglary devices on boxes 
• Funding for system development and maintenance. 


For this hospital performance improvement and a better 
patient treatment, medicines tracking impact is increased. 
Indeed, a European regulation was issued in 2016, to ensure 
the high quality of medicines available in hospitals for 
patients. The main requirement of this rule was that all 
pharmaceutical manufacturers and producers have to define a 
unique code in each individual packaging (for products 
identification), a serial number, a batch number and an expiry 
date. This new regulation is effective since February 2019. All 
European hospitals have to transform their medicines 
procurement process for respecting this regulation.  


4.1.1. Existing system analysis  
 At first, a modeling of the existing system has to be 


made. The stages and their times (from the moment the 
storekeeper receives the delivery until the time of storage) 
have been studied as shown in Fig. 7.  


 
Fig.7: Actigramme of the reception process. 


With this data it is important to explore existing 
technologies and find a solution that will automate the reading 
of QR codes (the codes that are in the boxes). Then, the 
objective is to propose a solution adapted to the architectural 
layout and to the constraints of the interior reception area (as 
shown in Fig. 8) of the pharmacy to carry out the serialization 
operation. 


 The process corresponds to the time of: 
• Reception  
• Verification of the delivery (the storekeeper verifies the 


name of the laboratory, compliance of the address, number 
of packages on the delivery slip). 


• Physical verification of packages (integrity inspection and 
also checking the correct delivery address). 


• Acceptance of receipt (as long as there is a match between 
the voucher and the physical entirety of the box, the 
storekeeper accepts it). 


• The validation of the reception (the traceability of the 
reception is carried out by sticking a label on the delivery 
slip). 


• Control of receipt (a preparer ensures that the purchase 
order and the delivery slip match, if the quantity ordered is 
received, if it is the product ordered). 


• The opening of the box (the box is opened, and the boxes 
of medicines taken out). 


• IT reception (step where drugs are entered into IT stock). 
• Medicine storage. 








Fig.8. Plan of the reception 


4.1.2. Studies Carried Out 
The main objective is to set up a new system but in a more 


automated way where time will not be changed since a new 
stage will be added, serialization. 


Three important studies (as shown in Fig 9) are carried out 
to find a good solution:  


Medicines
boxes 


reception


Medicines
scan


Medicines
registration


Medicines
validation


Medicines
package


for storage


Medicines
storage


Medicines
arrival


Medicines
in storage


Medicines
physical move


Medicines
flow validation


Medicines
in the WMS


Medicines
scanned


Medicines
out of boxes






 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664 1663
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2019) 000–000  7 


• A time study, where the time is analyzed from the moment 
that the storekeeper takes products, receives the order with 
the boxes of the laboratory until the end of the 
serialization.  The time of each step was measured.  


• A process study, a first group consisted of all the cartons 
containing the medicine boxes and a second group from 
the moment when the reception control ends until the end 
of the serialization, which corresponds to the time when 
the boxes are removed from the boxes, stored in the cart, 
scanned and the data entered and finalized. 


• The last study was ergonomics, the position in which the 
trainer must do all the serialization is not the best solution 
for good posture, because the chair and the table are low, 
and the trainer must therefore be lowered. In another point, 
the table where the drugs are located and the table where 
the serialization is carried out has a certain distance (10 
steps round trip) and, for this, the person who makes it 
must get up each time an order is finalized to look for other 
drugs, causing even greater fatigue. 
 





Fig.9. Studies for improving the reception 


 Finally, our third study was the reception area (as 
presented in Fig. 10), where the arrangement of tables, 
computers, electrical outlets and other objects was studied. 
The intention of this study was to find a better place to carry 
out all the steps, counting on better optimization and better 
ergonomics. 





Fig.10. Concentration of work 


4.1.3. Input data 
 The input data are the number of drugs that the 


pharmacy receives per day, the decreed standard, a study of 
the time, a study of the area and the reception area, as well as 
a study on optimization and the automation that can be done 
to improve and save time at the end will be carried out an 
occupational health study. 
• Number of drugs: 


○ So that we can study the technology and a solution; 
• Decreed standard: 
○ To respect and verify the application of rules at the time 


of implementation; 
• Time study: 
○ The time that people working at the reception take to 


process each cardboard that arrives and secondly a 
study of the time after the installation of the spray 
system to compare and analyse the different scenarios; 


• Surface study: 
○ A study to understand the space to set up a system that 


is well adapted and specially adjusted for reception; 
• Optimization and automation study: 
○ These two studies will be carried out after the 


implementation of the solution to seek possible 
improvements and with less time. 


• Occupational Health Study: 
○ Ergonomics study to improve the performance of 


storekeepers, where they can feel comfortable at work 
In synthesis, the immediate solution that was implemented 


is shown in Fig. 11. This solution takes into account 
ergonomics of the operator. The solution final solution which 
will be implemented has been tested with flexsim simulation 
for this area. It is to install an automated system at the 
entrance of the reception. The operator, after opening the 
boxes will only put them on a conveyor. They will follow one 
way for being scanned automatically and he could obtain 
directly the references for storing the product. All products 
with bad tracking keys will be oriented to a waste storage for 
being analyzed by a specialist later. This integration of new 
technologies will increase the operator ergonomics conditions 
in addition the previous organization. The purchasing phase is 
undergoing. 





 
Fig.11. Ergonomics solution for operator 


4.2. Human-Robot collaboration food and medicines 
distribution 


The second example studied in the hospital for validating 
the use of lean manufacturing combined with industry 4.0 and 
logistics 4.0 concept was nurse time and ergonomics 
management. Indeed, they actually have to transport 
medicines and food for taking care of patient. The existing 
system analysis has shown that patient number is increasing in 
the hospital, without the augmentation of the number of 
nurses. Then, they are full and could not spend more time 






1664 Dossou Paul-Eric  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 51 (2020) 1657–1664
8 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2020) 000–000 


with patient. The hospital has to pay supplementary hours to 
nurses (about 2700h). Due to respect of economic criteria, the 
situation and their number will not change. The study, once 
again by using Flexsim simulation, shows that by using 
Automated Intelligent Vehicles (AIVs) as presented in Fig. 
12, the hospital will make economy of 8 persons who actually 
spend their time by bringing food and of 5 persons for 
medicines.  


There are five floors in the hospital and the investment in 4 
AIVs will be sufficient for ensuring the food service and 
medicines dispatching. Indeed, both food and medicines are 
bringing at different times and the same AIV could be shared 
for both tasks.   
 


This solution is good on the economic point of view, 
because AIVs could work every time without being tired, 
nurses could focus on their tasks and being more efficient, 
patient would be satisfied, and the performance of the hospital 
will increase.  





 
Fig.12. Mobile robot for food logistics 


5. Conclusion  


In this paper a new framework for industry 4.0 concepts 
implementation in companies is presented. This framework is 
based on lean manufacturing combined with new technologies 
and organisations. But the kernel of the framework is 
sustainability. This framework developed is used for defining 
healthcare logistics 4.0 concepts in order to improve hospital 
performance.  


An example has been given on stock optimization and 
serialisation (medicine tracking) for illustrating how to use the 
framework for optimizing healthcare logistics performance 
and indubitably the hospital performance. A second example 
has been presented for showing how human could be at the 
center of new transformations and how this could be 
combined with new technologies for increasing hospital 
performance.  


A decision aided tool is being developed for supporting the 
healthcare transformations and facilitating data and rules 
management. For instance, the serialization case needs to 
know all rules on this tracking, to optimize medicines orders 
for decreasing the operator charge, and make an inventory of 
the medicine storage. This would be easier with an aided tool. 


The next step will be the test of the methodology for 
improving waste management in the hospital.  Due to Corona 
virus the end of study has been postponed. 


References 


[1] Castaldi, M., Sugano, D., Kreps, K., Cassidy, A., Kaban, J., Lean 
philosophy and the public hospital, Perioperative care and operative 
room management, Vol. 3, June 2016, 25-28, Elsevier. 


[2]  Franco, C., Alfonso-Lizarazo,E. Optimization under uncertainty of the 
pharmaceutical supply chain in hospitals, in Computers & Chemical 
Engineering, Vol. 135, April 2020, 106689, Elsevier. 


[3] Schonberger, R.J., Reconstituting lean in healthcare: From waste 
elimination toward ‘queue-less’ patient-focused care, Business horizon, 
Vol. 61, Issue 1, 13-22, 2018, Elsevier. 


[4] Garza-Reyes, J.A.,  Romero, J.T.,  Govindan, K.,  Cherrafi, A., 
Ramanathan, U., A PDCA-based approach to Environmental Value 
Stream Mapping (E-VSM), Journal of cleaner production, Vol. 180, 335-
348, 2018, Elsevier. 


[5]  Stock, T., Seliger, G., Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in 
Industry 4.0, Procedia CIRP 40 (2016), 536-541, Elsevier. 


[6] C. Santos, A. Mehsrai, A.C. Barros, M. Araujo, E. Ares, Towards 
Industry 4.0: An overview of European strategic Roadmaps, Procedia 
Manufacturing 13 (2017) 972-979, Elsevier. 


[7]  Tjahjono, B., Esplugues, C., Ares, E., Pelaez, G., What does Industry 4.0 
mean to Supply Chain? Procedia Manufacturing 13, (2017), 1175-1182, 
Elsevier. 


[8]  Frolov, V. G., Kaminchenko, D. I., Kovylkin, D. Y., Popova, J. A., 
Pavlova, A. A., The main economic factors of sustainable manufacturing 
within the industrial policy concept of Industry 4.0, Academy of 
Strategic Management Journal, Volume 16, Special Issue 2, 2017. 


[9] Butow, P., Hoque, E., Using artificial intelligence to analyse and teach 
communication in healthcare, The Breast, 50 (2020) 49-55, Elsevier. 


[10] Garbuio, M., Lin, N., Artificial intelligence as a Growth Engine for 
Health Care Startups: Emerging Business Models, California 
Management Review, Vol. 61 (2) 59-83, 2019.  


[11] Haenlein, M., Kaplan, A. A brief History of Artificial intelligence: On 
the past, Present, and Future of Artificial Intelligence, California 
Management Reviewn Vol. 61 (4) 5-14, 2019 


 [12] Haque, I., R., I., Neubert, J., Deep learning approaches to biomedical 
image segmentation, Informatics in Medicine Unlocked (2020), 
doihttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2020.100297 


[13] Lei, Y., Yang, B., Jiang, X., Jia, F., Li, N., Nandi, A.K., Applications of 
machine learning to machine fault diagnosis: A review and roadmap, 
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 138 (2020) 106587. 





 




