









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/njas


Review


A review of social science on digital agriculture, smart farming and
agriculture 4.0: New contributions and a future research agenda
Laurens Klerkxa,*, Emma Jakkub, Pierre Labarthec
a Knowledge, Technology and Innovation Group, Wageningen University, The Netherlands
b CSIRO Land and Water, Ecosciences Precinct Dutton Park, Queensland, Australia
c INRA, UMR AGIR, Toulouse, France


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Robotic farming
Precision agriculture
Digitalization
Digital social science
Data science
Responsible research and innovation
Agricultural knowledge and innovation systems


A B S T R A C T


While there is a lot of literature from a natural or technical sciences perspective on different forms of digitalization in
agriculture (big data, internet of things, augmented reality, robotics, sensors, 3D printing, system integration, ubi-
quitous connectivity, artificial intelligence, digital twins, and blockchain among others), social science researchers have
recently started investigating different aspects of digital agriculture in relation to farm production systems, value chains
and food systems. This has led to a burgeoning but scattered social science body of literature. There is hence lack of
overview of how this field of study is developing, and what are established, emerging, and new themes and topics. This
is where this article aims to make a contribution, beyond introducing this special issue which presents seventeen
articles dealing with social, economic and institutional dynamics of precision farming, digital agriculture, smart farming
or agriculture 4.0. An exploratory literature review shows that five thematic clusters of extant social science literature
on digitalization in agriculture can be identified: 1) Adoption, uses and adaptation of digital technologies on farm; 2)
Effects of digitalization on farmer identity, farmer skills, and farm work; 3) Power, ownership, privacy and ethics in
digitalizing agricultural production systems and value chains; 4) Digitalization and agricultural knowledge and in-
novation systems (AKIS); and 5) Economics and management of digitalized agricultural production systems and value
chains. The main contributions of the special issue articles are mapped against these thematic clusters, revealing new
insights on the link between digital agriculture and farm diversity, new economic, business and institutional ar-
rangements both on-farm, in the value chain and food system, and in the innovation system, and emerging ways to
ethically govern digital agriculture. Emerging lines of social science enquiry within these thematic clusters are iden-
tified and new lines are suggested to create a future research agenda on digital agriculture, smart farming and agri-
culture 4.0. Also, four potential new thematic social science clusters are also identified, which so far seem weakly
developed: 1) Digital agriculture socio-cyber-physical-ecological systems conceptualizations; 2) Digital agriculture
policy processes; 3) Digitally enabled agricultural transition pathways; and 4) Global geography of digital agriculture
development. This future research agenda provides ample scope for future interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary
science on precision farming, digital agriculture, smart farming and agriculture 4.0.


1. Introduction


1.1. Digitalization as a transformative force in agricultural production
systems, value chains and food systems


Digitalization, the socio-technical process of applying digital in-
novations, is an increasingly ubiquitous trend. Digitalization comprises
phenomena and technologies such as big data, internet of things (IoT),
augmented reality, robotics, sensors, 3D printing, system integration,


ubiquitous connectivity, artificial intelligence, machine learning, di-
gital twins, and blockchain among others (Alm et al., 2016; Smith,
2018; Tilson et al., 2010). Digitalization is expected to radically
transform everyday life (Yoo, 2010) and productive processes in agri-
culture and associated food, fibre and bioenergy supply chains and
systems (Poppe et al., 2013; Smith, 2018) and initial signs of trans-
formation are already visible (Di Silvestre et al., 2018; Leviäkangas,
2016; Rotz et al., 2019a).1 In the agricultural sector, several concepts
have emerged to express different forms of digitalization in agricultural


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315
Received 16 October 2019; Received in revised form 28 October 2019; Accepted 28 October 2019


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: laurens.klerkx@wur.nl (L. Klerkx).


1 At the same time, it should be recognised that digitalization in agriculture has been going for decades already, expressed for example through work on decision
support systems (Leeuwis, 1993, 1999. McCown, 2002) and also precision agriculture has a long trajectory already (Wolf and Buttel, 1996; Wolf and Wood, 1997).



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/15735214





























https://www.elsevier.com/locate/njas

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315

mailto:laurens.klerkx@wur.nl

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315&domain=pdf




production systems, value chains and more broadly food systems. These
include Smart Farming (Blok and Gremmen, 2018; Wolfert et al., 2017),
Precision Agriculture or Precision Farming (Wolf and Buttel, 1996;
Eastwood et al., 2017b), Decision Agriculture (Leonard et al., 2017),
Digital Agriculture (Keogh and Henry, 2016; Shepherd et al., 2018),
Agriculture 4.0 (Rose and Chilvers, 2018) or what is referred to in
French as Agriculture Numérique (i.e. Numerical Agriculture - Bellon-
Maurel and Huyghe, 2016).2 Regardless of the exact term used, digi-
talization implies that management tasks on-farm and off-farm (in the
broader value chain and food system) focus on different sorts of data
(on location, weather, behaviour, phytosanitary status, consumption,
energy use, prices and economic information, etc.), using sensors, ma-
chines, drones, and satellites to monitor animals, soil, water, plants and
humans. The data obtained is used to interpret the past and predict the
future, to make more timely or accurate decisions, through constant
monitoring or specific big data science enquiries (Eastwood et al.,
2017a; Janssen et al., 2017; Wolfert et al., 2017).


Digitalization in agriculture is thus expected to provide technical
optimization of agricultural production systems, value chains and food
systems. Furthermore, it has been argued that it may help address so-
cietal concerns around farming, including provenance and traceability
of food (Dawkins, 2017), animal welfare in livestock industries (Yeates,
2017) and the environmental impact of different farming practices
(Balafoutis et al., 2017; Busse et al., 2015). Digitalization is also ex-
pected to enhance knowledge exchange and learning, using ubiquitous
data (Baumüller, 2017; Daum et al., 2018; Eichler Inwood and Dale,
2019) and improve monitoring of crises and controversies in agri-
cultural chains and sectors (Stevens et al., 2016). The uptake inter-
nationally of digital technologies in the past two decades has been most
prevalent in agricultural sectors such as cropping and viticulture
through precision farming technologies (Bramley, 2009), and to a lesser
extent in animal-based farming (Borchers and Bewley, 2015; Eastwood
et al., 2017a), and there are high expectations as regards its further
diffusion and transformative potential (Rose and Chilvers, 2018;
Shepherd et al., 2018).


The scientific literature on digital agriculture has primarily focused
on the technical aspects of applying these technologies for improving
agricultural practices and productivity (Rutten et al., 2013; Wathes
et al., 2008), as well as improving post-farmgate processes, such as
postharvest quality monitoring in logistic process and real-time trace-
ability (Wolfert et al., 2017). By now, there is a large body of pre-
dominantly natural and design science oriented literature on (potential)
applications of digital technologies in agriculture. This is evidenced by
an increasing number of review articles on topics such as precision
farming, big data analysis, drones, artificial intelligence and robotics,
3D printing, artificial intelligence, IoT, and the transformative potential
of these digital technologies for agricultural production systems, value
chains and food systems (de Amorim et al., 2019; Dick et al., 2019; El
Bilali and Allahyari, 2018a; Hunt and Daughtry, 2018; Kamilaris et al.,
2017; Mogili and Deepak, 2018; Patrício and Rieder, 2018; Portanguen
et al., 2019; Shamshiri et al., 2018; Skvortsov et al., 2018; Smith, 2018;
Verdouw et al., 2013, 2016a,b; Voon et al., 2019; Weersink et al., 2018;
Zhang and Wei, 2017; Zhao et al., 2019).


1.2. The importance of interdisciplinary social science on digital agriculture:
aims of the special issue and this introductory review article


The body of social science literature on social, economic, and in-
stitutional approaches to investigating digital agriculture has also been
growing in recent years. It has for example looked at management as-
pects of the digitalization of agriculture, the social dimensions of the


innovation processes surrounding the digitalization of agriculture, but
also critically scrutinizing its impact on people, institutions, animals
and ecosystems. Whereas some of the early publications date from more
than two decades ago (Wolf et al., 2001; Wolf and Buttel, 1996; Wolf
and Wood, 1997), given the technological advances and the perva-
siveness of digital technologies in all realms of society (Scholz et al.,
2018), the last 5 years have seen an accelerated growth in social science
publications on digital agriculture (as will also become clear in section
2). The topic of social, economic and institutional aspects of digital
agriculture has also received increasing dedicated attention at scientific
conferences, such as the 2018 International Farming Systems Associa-
tion symposium, the 2019 European Society for Rural Sociology con-
ference, and the upcoming 2020 International Rural Sociology Asso-
ciation conference, with numerous specific session, themes and
workshops. Large science and innovation programmes also focus on
digital agriculture and the social, economic and institutional aspects.
These include the European Horizon 2020 project ‘Internet of Farm &
Food’ (IoF2020), the Digiscape Future Science Platform from CSIRO in
Australia, the #DigitAg programme in France, the NZBIDA project from
AgResearch in New Zealand, the DESIRA, FAIRshare and Smart-AKIS
projects and thematic networks in Europe, the Canada Digital Agri-Food
programme and the Cornell Open Ag initiative in the United States.


There is also a growing interest in the topic of digital agriculture
within policy circles, including the socio-economic elements of digita-
lization, and this has resulted in several policymaker and practitioner
oriented publications. For instance, the Standing Committee on
Agricultural Research from the EU, through its Agricultural Knowledge
and Innovation Systems Strategic Workgroup, has a specific focus on
Smart Farming/Digital Agriculture (Poppe et al., 2013; EU SCAR AKIS,
2019) and reviews commissioned by the EU have emerged on the topic
(Soma et al., 2019). The World Bank has published a sourcebook and a
future outlook (World Bank, 2019; World Bank, 2017), and the FAO has
recently published a status report (Trendov et al., 2019), all of them
presenting several experiences with and models of digital agriculture.
The Australian Farm Institute has organized three policy oriented
conferences on ‘Digital Disruption’ in recent years (2016–2018), while
the OECD also organized a conference in 2018 on the topic and pub-
lished a policy-oriented publication (Jouanjean, 2019).


Considering the growing attention to digital agriculture in both
natural and social sciences, as well as policy discourse, the authors of
this introductory review article, as guest editors of this special issue,
thought it would be timely to bring together global experiences of social
and institutional responses to digital agriculture. The idea was that with
digital agriculture applications becoming more established, it was a
good moment to bring together a collection of conceptual and empirical
social science articles on this topic. Therefore, the special issue ori-
ginally aimed to answer the following question as formulated in the call
for articlespublished in 2018: what reconfigurations of practices and in-
stitutions are emerging to embed and enact digital agriculture technologies
and counteract possible negative consequences? The call indeed yielded
some articles showing reconfigurations of practices and institutions,
showing for example new digital agriculture business models, new
advisory practices, as well as showing practical and institutional diffi-
culties and challenges in dealing with digital agriculture. Additionally,
the call has also yielded conceptual reflections on ethics, digital social
system concepts, and digital innovation concepts (see section 3). Given
the recent surge of social science literature on digital agriculture noted
above, of which many articles were actually published during the de-
velopment of this special issue, the contributions of the 17 articles in
this special issue do not fall into a vacuum but add to a rapidly growing
body of social science literature.


However, while there has been growing interest in digital agri-
culture from different social science disciplines (such as sociology,
geography, innovation studies and economics), as well as humanities2 While being cognizant of the diversity of terms employed in the literature,


and also by the articles in the special issue, for the sake of clarity this article
henceforth mainly employs the term ‘digital agriculture’.


L. Klerkx, et al.


















disciplines (such as ethics, law and philosophy)3, the extant social sci-
ence literature on digital agriculture is rather scattered. Despite the
existence of some review articles on particular issues, such as the po-
litical economy of digital agriculture (Rotz et al., 2019a) and perspec-
tive articles on ethics (Carbonell, 2016), most review articles focus on
technical issues or aim to provide an overview of the state of the art
within a certain subfield (Aker, 2011; Banhazi et al., 2012; Protopop
and Shanoyan, 2016; Baumüller, 2017; Eichler Inwood and Dale, 2019;
Kamilaris et al., 2017; Mogili and Deepak, 2018; Patrício and Rieder,
2018; Salemink et al., 2017; Verdouw et al., 2013; Wolfert et al., 2017;
Zhao et al., 2019).


This introductory review article therefore aims to provide an overview
and thematic clustering of different, yet related, disciplines of social science
literature on digital agriculture, show what the special issue articles add to
this body of work and provide an agenda for future research. The three
specific questions it seeks to answer are: 1) what are the main thematic
clusters of social science literature on digitalization in agriculture, based on
an explorative review; 2) what are the main insights from the articles in this
special issue and how do they connect to these thematic clusters and/or
open new lines of enquiry?; and 3) what are some possible future questions
still to be explored by social sciences in this field?


In answering these questions, this introductory review article and the
special issue as a whole demonstrate an interdisciplinary perspective at two
levels. The first level of interdisciplinarity is between social science dis-
ciplines. The special issue brings together contributions from sociology,
science and technology studies, economics, design thinking and policy
studies, showing the diversity and complementarity of angles on the topic of
digital agriculture. These angles highlight both the positive and negative
effects that digitalisation might have on a sustainable development of
agriculture, food systems and rural areas. It also stresses the need to support
the reflexivity of actors (farmers, advisors, policy makers, researchers)
contributing to the development of digital agriculture.


The critical social science perspective on digitalization and digital
agriculture taken in this special issue has important implications for a
second level of interdisciplinarity, between social sciences and natural,
technical or life sciences, which is a key aim of NJAS-Wageningen
Journal of Life Sciences. Outlining a future research agenda and new
questions for social sciences on digitalisation could help researchers
from other disciplines shed a new light on the direction and conditions
they take into account when developing, testing, implementing and
scaling new digital technologies. The article proceeds as follows. In
section 2 we outline five major current thematic clusters in the social
science literature, and in section 3 we map the special issue article
contributions against these thematic clusters. Then, in section 4 we
raise several emerging questions in the five existing thematic clusters,
but also present four potential thematic clusters with sets of new
questions. Section 5 presents some concluding remarks and a call for
both social and natural sciences to engage with this future research
agenda on social, economic, legal, organizational and ethical aspects of
digital agriculture through interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary ap-
proaches.


2. Major current thematic clusters in the social science literature
on digitalization in agriculture


The overview of thematic clusters of social science literature pre-
sented in this section is based on an exploratory review4, achieved by


searching with keywords such as ‘digital agriculture’, ‘smart farming’ in
the comprehensive scientific database Scopus, with a focus on social
science or interdisciplinary journals focused on agriculture (such as the
Journal of Rural Studies, the Journal of Peasant Studies, Sociologia
Ruralis, Agricultural Systems, NJAS-Wageningen Journal of Life Sci-
ences, Land Use Policy, and the Journal of Agricultural Education and
Extension). Furthermore, snowball methods were employed, such as
using references in articles found, or screening articles citing pioneer
work on digitalization. This led to over 100 social science articles on
digital agriculture, and allowed for the identification of five major
thematic clusters of social science literature related to digitalization in
agriculture, some established and others emerging. The different the-
matic clusters draw on different social science disciplines (such as so-
ciology, geography, economics, communication science, management
science and innovation science) and humanities (philosophy, ethics),
hence supporting interdisciplinary debates rather than a juxtaposition
of disciplinary standpoints on digitalization. Table 1 provides an
overview of articles reviewed per thematic cluster, social science dis-
ciplines, the theoretical and methodological perspectives and what ar-
ticles in the special issue pertain to the different thematic clusters
(detailed in section 3). Note that we focus here on agriculture, and not
on how digitalization affects rural areas, which is a broader topic going
beyond agriculture alone (see e.g. Roberts et al., 2017; Salemink et al.,
2017).


2.1. Adoption, uses and adaptation of digital technologies on farm


This first thematic cluster is well established, with one line of en-
quiry focused on different aspects of precision technology adoption on
farm5, examining both economic and behavioural aspects. This litera-
ture concentrates on individual adoption determinants (Barnes et al.,
2019; Hansen, 2015; Jensen et al., 2012; Kernecker et al., 2019;
Leonard et al., 2017; Tey and Brindal, 2012), as well as extension and
communicative interventions to stimulate adoption (Kutter et al.,
2011). Another line of enquiry examines precision agriculture use on
farm and how it affects farming practices (Fountas et al., 2005; Hansen,
2015; Hay and Pearce, 2014) and post-adoption processes of adaptation
(Higgins et al., 2017; Schewe and Stuart, 2015), through concepts such
as ‘tinkering’ and ‘assemblages’. The latter topic has also been analysed
from a beyond-farm level perspective, looking at the broader networks
and innovation systems in which technology is shaped and where co-
evolution between the technology and broader social and institutional
environments takes place (Eastwood et al., 2017, 2012). This cluster
builds on a variety of methods, ranging from modelling approaches of
the costs and benefits of precision farming (Schimmelpfennig and Ebel,
2016), quantitative or econometric approaches testing the effects of
different variables on adoption (such as farm size and specialisation,
farmers’ age, education, etc., see Annosi et al., 2019; Barnes et al.,
2019; Lowenberg-DeBoer and Erickson, 2019), to more qualitative
work, highlighting the situation of both adopters and non-adopters, and
accounting for less measurable aspects, such as material contingencies
and cultural dimensions of knowledge (Higgins et al., 2017). It should
also be noted that while most research in industrial contexts focuses on
the adoption of precision farming technologies, research in Africa ra-
ther focuses on the adoption (or non-adoption) of market information
systems (Wyche and Steinfield, 2016). The literature on the African
context looks at agriculture specific decision support tools as well as the


3While we recognize that humanities comprise different disciplines than
those considered part of the social sciences, in the remainder of the paper we
will use the term social science as an umbrella term. So when we talk about
social science, we sometimes also refer to humanities in this article.
4 This review was not a systematic review, as that would go beyond the scope


of this introductory article. Nonetheless the authors feel the search results were
quite comprehensive and allow for the clustering presented.


5 While precision agriculture is a form of digital agriculture, and is also
connected with broader value chain structures (e.g. Carolan, 2018b), some
commentators argue that concepts such as Smart Farming and Agriculture 4.0
are ‘larger’ concepts, since as Smart Farming includes digitalization of supply
chains and food systems as a whole and Agriculture 4.0 may also comprise
other technologies such as gene editing (Wolfert et al., 2017; Rose and Chilvers,
2018).


L. Klerkx, et al.










role of generic technologies, such as cell phones, in access to informa-
tion on input and commodities prices (Baumüller, 2017).


2.2. Effects of digitalization on farmer identity, farmer skills, and farm
work


This thematic cluster, which is also well established, focuses on how
digital technologies impact on the method of farming, demanding dif-
ferent knowledge, skills and labour management among farmers. One
strand of enquiry is rooted in systems design and focuses on the prac-
tical issues of human-robot interaction in farming, such as ergonomics
and health and safety, as a review article by Vasconez et al. (2019)
shows. Another strand of research within the field of rural sociology
looks at broader socio-cultural implications, drawing on a range of
theorists (e.g. Foucault, Latour, Durkheim, Giddens) and perspectives,
such as political economy and assemblage theory. Digitalization can
have major impacts on the cultural fabric of rural areas and farmer
identities as it affects what it means to be a farmer (Burton et al., 2012;
Carolan, 2017b). Digitalization may change the culture of farming from
‘hands-on’ and experience driven management to a data-driven ap-
proach (Butler and Holloway, 2016; Carolan, 2017b, 2019a; Eastwood
et al., 2012) and may ‘discipline’ farmers’ work routines in certain ways
(Carolan, 2019), conditioned by ‘algorithmic rationality’ (Miles, 2019).
As a consequence, the compatibility of digitalization with approaches


such as agro-ecology is a matter of debate (Plumecocq et al., 2018; Van
Hulst et al., 2020), as it has been argued that agro-ecology would
specifically require hands-on farming as opposed to digitally-mediated
farming.


Questions have also been raised about the effect of digitalization on
farmers’ autonomy, including concerns about farmers becoming ‘data
labourers’ (Rotz et al., 2019b). Digitalization has also been found to
affect gendered identities on farms (Bear and Holloway, 2015; Hay and
Pearce, 2014). Furthermore, technology aimed at automating tasks and
increasing efficiency may deskill or displace farmers and farm workers
and exclude or discriminate against those not digitally literate. This
may have negative effects on demand for rural labour and hence affect
marginalized groups such as migrants, in a context of growing separa-
tion between labour and capital in agriculture (Carolan, 2019; Rotz
et al., 2019b; Smith, 2018). However, other authors argue that digital
technologies may also be merged into existing practices to create
combinations of ‘digital’ and ‘analogue’ skills (Burton and Riley, 2018),
or give rise to a new sort of ‘responsible professionalism’ (Blok, 2018).


2.3. Power, ownership, privacy and ethics in digitalizing agricultural
production systems and value chains


This established cluster of work applies critical social science per-
spectives on digitalization in agriculture, focusing on the political


Table 1
Overview of thematic clusters in terms of social science disciplines, theoretical and methodological perspectives, and how they link to special issue articles.
Thematic cluster Number of reviewed articles


in this thematic cluster
(some are present in several
clusters)


Principal social science disciplines
involved


Examples of theoretical and
methodological perspectives used in
this thematic cluster


Articles in the special
issue pertaining to this
thematic cluster


Adoption, uses and adaptation of digital
technologies on farm


16 Economics, sociology, innovation
studies, science and technology
studies


Adoption and diffusion theory
Behavioral psychology
Practice theory
Assemblage theory
Cost and benefit modelling
Econometrics
Evolutionary economics
Innovation systems


Janc et al., 2019
Knierim et al, 2019


Effects of digitalization on farmer
identity, farmer skills, and farm
work


16 Sociology, social geography,
anthropology


Political economy
Practice and identity theory
Studies of discourse, power, politics
and social transformation (e.g.
Foucault, Bourdieu, Durkheim,
Giddens)
Actor-network theory
Assemblage theory
Gender studies
Ethnography
Farming styles
Cultural scripts


Vik et al., 2019
Lioutas et al., 2019


Power, ownership, privacy and ethics in
digitalizing agricultural production
systems and value chains


28 Sociology, political science,
philosophy and ethics, science and
technology studies


Political economy
Institutional economics
Animal ethics
Human ethics
Responsible Research and Innovation
Activity theory


Van der Burg et al.,
2019
Lioutas et al., 2019
Jakku et al., 2019
Bronson, 2019
Wiseman et al., 2019
Regan, 2019


Digitalization and agricultural
knowledge and innovation systems


27 Innovation studies, science and
technology studies,
communication science,
economics


Knowledge and Innovation systems
Social media analysis
Learning theories
Evolutionary economics
Socio-technical transitions


Fielke et al., 2019
Ingram and Gaskell,
2019
Relf-Eckstein et al.,
2019
Rijswijk et al., 2019
Eastwood et al., 2019
Ayre et al., 2019


Economics and management of
digitalized agricultural production
systems and value chains


21 Economics, management science,
sociology


Value chain theories
Business model theories
Risk analysis
Institutional economics
Service economics


Phillips et al., 2019
Rojo Gimeno et al., 2019


L. Klerkx, et al.






economies and political ecologies of digital agriculture. Key issues in
this thematic cluster include issues of power, data ownership, inclusion
and exclusion, privacy, and how to deal with these issues ethically. One
strand of enquiry uses the lens of corporate structures in relation to
production systems and supply chains, often with political economy or
science and technology studies perspectives. This literature examines
how digitalization changes or reproduces the rules, institutions and
balances of power governing these systems, how that affects different
actors and what responses or resistances emerge and how ethical issues
such as those around privacy and data ownership emerge and are ad-
dressed (Sykuta, 2016; Bronson, 2018; Carbonell, 2016; Carolan,
2017a, 2018a,b,c, 2019; Eastwood et al., 2017a; Fleming et al., 2018;
Fraser, 2019a, b; Freidberg, 2019; Rose and Chilvers, 2018; Rotz et al.,
2019a; Schuster, 2017; Miles, 2019). This research includes critiques of
the lack of policy interventions tackling the digital divides produced by
rapid, unregulated technological change and the power imbalances that
could constrain the integration of societal issues (Bronson and
Knezevic, 2019). Other research identifies how risks such as cyber-at-
tacks may destabilize precision agricultural systems and digitalized
food systems (Barreto and Amaral, 2018; Trendov et al., 2019; West,
2018).


Besides digital agriculture having implications for humans, animals
are also affected by digital agriculture. This happens for example in
dairy farming, where this is operationalized through approaches such as
robotic milking systems (Driessen and Heutinck, 2015) and use of
technologies to replace animal husbandry tasks (Butler and Holloway,
2016). Robotic milking adoption has been shown to involve a varied
range of factors, and therefore equally varied outcomes for animals,
people, and the environment (Schewe and Stuart, 2015). This has given
rise to philosophical and ethical perspectives, in which ethical chal-
lenges affecting animal autonomy and human-animal relationships of
farms have been analysed (Bear and Holloway, 2019; Driessen and
Heutinck, 2015; Bos and Munnichs, 2016).


2.4. Digitalization and agricultural knowledge and innovation systems


Digitalization has also been observed to be a driving force of the
evolution of agricultural knowledge and innovation systems (AKIS). In
this thematic cluster, which has emerged recently but is increasingly
becoming established, different lines of enquiry can be discerned with
either a macro, meso or micro perspective on knowledge and innova-
tion systems. From a macro perspective, some research that uses in-
novation systems perspectives looks at how innovation support struc-
tures enable digitalization, but also change themselves under the
influence of digitalization, e.g. by incorporating big data analysis
(Kamilaris et al., 2017). Some research also looks at how AKIS for di-
gital agriculture are shaped through a diversity of existing and new
actors in these systems: high-tech firms (e.g. drones or satellite manu-
facturers, etc.), service industries, and multinationals producing
farming equipment, such as self-driving tractors and automated milking
machines (Eastwood et al., 2017b). Given the ethical concerns raised in
cluster 3 (section 2.3), there is an emerging literature that explores how
innovation systems can apply principles of Responsible Research and
Innovation (RRI) (Owen et al., 2012) to the digitalization of agricultural
production systems, value chains and food systems (Bronson, 2018;
Eastwood et al., 2017a; Jirotka et al., 2017; Rose and Chilvers, 2018).
This literature also explores the role that transdisciplinary science can
play in supporting integrative solutions that look at a combination of
technological, ethical, social, economic and business challenges
(Shepherd et al., 2018). At a meso perspective, some research, drawing
on theories of learning and communication, looks at how networks of
learning are formed to enable digital agriculture innovation (Eastwood
et al., 2012; Kelly et al., 2017; Van Der Vorst et al., 2015). For example,
some studies examine how digital platforms and social media enable
local and global information sharing and peer learning (Aker, 2011;


Baumüller, 2016; Burton and Riley, 2018; Chowdhury and Hambly
Odame, 2013; Jespersen et al., 2014; Kaushik et al., 2018; Kelly et al.,
2017; Munthali et al., 2018). Other studies have also looked at how user
generated data, through social media analysis and citizen science ap-
proaches, feeds into real-time decision making and informs policy de-
cisions (Cieslik et al., 2018; Leeuwis et al., 2018; Stevens et al., 2016).
At the micro-level of knowledge systems, using theories of learning and
user centred-design, other research looks at the continuous processes of
how digital decision support systems are better attuned to users
(O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Antle et al., 2017; Rose et al., 2018; Driessen
and Heutinck, 2015; Rose et al., 2016; Lindblom et al., 2017) and how
advisors interact with farmers to connect ‘digital knowledge systems’ to
‘farmers knowledge systems’ (Tsouvalis et al., 2000; Lundström and
Lindblom, 2018; Bechtet, 2019).


2.5. Economics and management of digitalized agricultural production
systems and value chains


While there is some generic (i.e. non-agriculture specific) literature
looking at economic and business model aspects of digital technologies
and big data (see e.g. Koch and Windsperger, 2017; Teece, 2018; Teece
and Linden, 2017), in agriculture the body of work with this focus
seems to be more modest. There is some research reflecting on costs and
benefits of unmanned aircraft systems, for example (Hunt and
Daughtry, 2018), or of other precision farming technologies
(Schimmelpfennig and Ebel, 2016). Related to the literature on preci-
sion technology adoption, one strand of enquiry in this emerging the-
matic cluster looks at investment decisions (Rutten et al., 2018). Some
research has tried to assess the effect of precision farming technologies
on productivity in the agricultural sector. Lio and Liu (2006) for in-
stance show a positive effect of these technologies, but also potential
divergences and inequalities across countries. Some pieces reflect, be-
yond the farm level, on the (potential) economic impacts of digitalized
supply chains (Jouanjean, 2019; Smith, 2018), and big data services
and analysis (Boehlje, 2016; Sykuta, 2016).


Another important stream of research deals with the economic im-
pact of digital technologies on markets, mostly using theoretical and
methodological approaches embedded in micro-economics, modelling
and econometrics of the relation between demand, supply and patterns
of use of information. In the context of developing countries, many
studies have assessed the impacts of market information systems to
compensate for asymmetries of information and enhance access to
markets (David-Benz et al., 2017; Aker, 2011; Islam and Grönlund,
2010; Agyekumhene et al., 2018). In the context of industrialised
agriculture, there are discussions about actors developing information
systems to support farmers in risk management, be they climatic or
financial risks (Fraisse et al., 2006). The business models associated
with these services are often related to new forms of insurance for
farmers, such as index-based climate insurance systems. Nevertheless,
empirical research about business models of digital agriculture remains
rare, and typologies are often limited to new direct marketing solutions
between farmers and consumers (Andreopoulou et al., 2008). Con-
nected to the issue of power, as mentioned in section 2.3, some studies
taking a political or institutional economy or value chain perspective,
highlight potential downsides of vertically integrated systems and new
business models. In such models, multinational corporations offer large
‘digital package deals’ to farmers (Bronson, 2018; Bronson and
Knezevic, 2016; Carolan, 2017b, 2018b). These package deals tend to
maintain balances of power to the benefit of models of agriculture
based on the intensive use of chemical input, as hypothesised by Wolf
and Buttel (1996) already in the 1990s. However, innovative business
models may provide new opportunities for reshaping value chains. For
example, the idea of the ‘circular economy’ aims to find ways for tra-
ditional streams of ‘waste’ to be converted into diverse value-added
products through on-farm processing (Galliano et al., 2017;


L. Klerkx, et al.






Geissdoerfer et al., 2017), or start-ups launching platform technologies
aimed at preventing food waste at the consumer end of (urban) food
systems (Miles and Smith, 2015).


3. Contributions of the articles in this special issue


The seventeen articles in this special issue advance our under-
standing of the thematic research clusters presented in the previous
section. The articles explore social responses to smart farming across
different empirical and geographical contexts, ranging from Canada
and the United States (Bronson, 2019; Phillips et al., 2019; Relf-
Eckstein et al., 2019), to Australia and New Zealand (Ayre et al., 2019;
Eastwood et al., 2019; Fielke et al., 2019; Jakku et al., 2019; Rijswijk
et al., 2019; Wiseman et al., 2019) and Europe (Janc et al., 2019;
Knierim et al., 2019; Regan, 2019; Vik et al., 2019). Some articles are
not bound to a certain geographical location but present conceptual
reflections on issues such as ethics (van der Burg et al., 2019), digital
knowledge and activity systems (Ingram and Gaskell, 2019; Lioutas
et al., 2019) or the value of digital information (Rojo Gimeno et al.,
2019). A variety of theoretical frameworks are presented, including
activity theory, innovation opportunity space, the multi-level perspec-
tive on socio-technical transitions, the responsible research and in-
novation framework, as well as the perspective of agricultural knowl-
edge and innovation systems, affordances, and the ontological
framework of syntactic, semantic and pragmatic capacities.


3.1. Contributions to the thematic cluster adoption, uses and adaptation of
digital technologies


Despite many promises and cases studies about the development of
digital technologies in agriculture, there are still many uncertainties
about their actual use by farmers. Two articles of this special issue
contribute to filling this knowledge gap, using quantitative methodol-
ogies. The article by Janc et al.(2019) on internet use among Polish
farmers gives insights into some of the basic elements needed to enable
farmers to digitalize their practices. Janc et al. (2019) find that there is
still a large ‘digital divide’ in terms of access and capabilities to use the
internet. Underlying reasons that Janc et al. (2019) found include the
way in which the social fabric of Polish agriculture may have a dis-
abling role, whereby digital technology is seen as individualistic and
seen to erode the previous feelings and institutions associated with
common knowledge acquisition, based on local ties of blood and
neighbourliness. The authors conclude that Polish farming still finds
itself at the preliminary phase of entry into smart agriculture, a situa-
tion which may also be found elsewhere and presents a challenge in the
development of a new and locally embedded digital knowledge. Hence,
beyond giving insights on technology adoption, this article also hints at
changes in farmer identity, as discussed in section 2.1 and the devel-
opment of digital agricultural knowledge and innovation systems, as
discussed in section 2.4.


The article by Knierim et al.(2019) provides a better understanding
of the various profiles of farmers using digital technologies in diverse
European contexts. Based on interviews with farmers and experts in
Germany and insights from six other countries (the UK, the
Netherlands, France, Spain, Greece, and Serbia), they enrich previous
findings (Barnes et al., 2019) about the effects of farms’ socio-economic
characteristics and orientation in terms of production systems on the
adoption of precision farming technologies. An original contribution of
the article is that it assesses the perceptions of actors regarding the
impacts of such technologies on societal issues, including environ-
mental protection. Their multi-actor approach reveals contrasting ex-
pectations. While positive expectations are widely expressed by experts
and stakeholders from the AKIS, German farmers have more reserva-
tions about the performance of precision farming in moderating farms’
externalities on the environment. This result is interpreted as a realistic
assessment of technological pros and cons, which is however not


effectively supported by empirical evidence, due to a lack of informa-
tion, training, and access to advice on precision farming.


3.2. Contributions to the thematic cluster on effects of digitalization on
farmer identity, farmer skills, and farm work


Two articles in this special issue make contributions to the thematic
cluster on the effects of digitalization on farmer identity, farmer skills
and farm work. In their article on the use and expansion of automatic
milking systems (AMS) in dairy farming in Norway, Vik et al.(2019)
explore how this form of smart farming technology is changing the
nature of farm work, farmer skills and farmer identity in this context.
Their analysis uncovers the broader networks and systems in which this
technology is shaped and the social aspects and political implications of
its development, and hence the performative aspects of robots. They
find that the primary motives for investing in milking robots relate to
quality of life, including a more flexible workday, reduced physical
work, as well as a desire to achieve what is regarded as the future
standard of dairy farming. The domestic political framework has not
pushed the observed structural developments, rather policy has adapted
to them. Vik et al. (2019) conclude that structural developments re-
sulting from the introduction of robotic milking in Norwegian agri-
culture are a series of unplanned consequences of farm level strategies,
political adaptations, technological characteristics, and milking robot
capacities. This conclusion is echoed by the work of Lioutas et al.
(2019), who take an activity theory approach and see the farm as a
cyber-physical-social system. Based on an analysis of pertinent litera-
ture, Lioutas et al. (2019) examine how big data may affect farmers,
both as users and co-producers of big data, and how it may guide their
decision making, as well as how this affects and is affected by the wider
community and institutional setting that farmers operate within.


3.3. Contributions to the thematic cluster on power, ownership, privacy and
ethics in digitalizing agricultural production systems and value chains


A strength of this special issue is that it gathers together a unique set
of studies in various sectors and supply chains to illustrate how digital
technologies impact on power relationships and highlight a range of
data ownership and privacy issues related to digital technologies. Five
articles explore this issue in various contexts, across Europe, North
America and Australia. Altogether, these articles extend to new tech-
nologies the debate opened 20 years ago by Wolf and Buttel (1996),
which has resurged in recent years (see section 2.3): does digitalization
of agriculture transform supply chains or does it reinforce the position
of dominant actors and industries? Firstly, van der Burg et al. (2019)
review the literature on ethical challenges associated with smart
farming and identify three key themes: (i) data ownership and access;
(ii) distribution of power; and (iii) impacts on human life and society.
However, despite increasing attention in research, policy and practice
for ethics of smart farming/digital agriculture, they conclude that there
seems to be different yet implicit ideas regarding the purpose and
function of digital farms in society, which are not made explicit in re-
search and societal debates.


The article by Lioutas et al. (2019), besides looking at farm level
effects (see section 3.2), also reflects on how power dynamics and in-
stitutional factors shape the use of big data, including issues sur-
rounding data ownership and privacy and power imbalances in access
to the value derived from the use of big data. Similar issues are explored
by Jakku et al. (2019) through their case study of perceptions of big
data applications in the Australian grains industry, which combines a
multi-level perspective on transitions with social practice theory. Their
analysis demonstrates how concerns about transparency, data owner-
ship and access and the distribution of risks and benefits are driving
social responses to smart farming.


The article by Bronson (2019) sheds light on the norms and values
embedded in digital agriculture concept, tool and artefact design and


L. Klerkx, et al.






how this relates to the distribution of roles and balances of power in
various North American supply chains. Bronson argues that decisions
made by scientists and designers can impact on the directions innova-
tion take and thus influence the resultant agri-food systems. She found
that social actors working in private and public contexts to shape these
innovations hold a narrow set of values that characterise a ‘good
farmer’, ‘good farming’ and ‘good technology’ in such a way that their
data practices privilege large scale and commodity crop farmers. This
reinforces existing power structures and (im)balances. The article
concludes by suggesting, similar to Van der Burg et al. (2019), a re-
sponsible research and innovation approach. The principles of re-
sponsible research and innovation proposed by Bronson (2019) in-
cludes engaging engineers and designers, paying particular attention to
social innovations in an emerging socio-technical system, which has
had a rather technological innovation focus. Such an approach also
identifies the need for necessary legal measures to regulate control over
data and distribution of power connected to streamlined and standar-
dized interoperable data systems.


The article by Wiseman et al. (2019) reveals a lack of transparency
and clarity around issues such as data ownership, portability, privacy,
trust and liability in the commercial relationships governing digital
agriculture. They find that these are contributing to farmers’ reluctance
to engage in the widespread sharing of their farm data. At the heart of
farmers’ concerns is the lack of trust between the farmers as data
contributors, and those third parties who collect, aggregate and share
their data. Wiseman et al. (2019) find that farmers currently feel that
they bear too much of the risk and vulnerability and argue that broader
legal and regulatory issues must not be ignored. Current complex data
licences presented to farmers are on a ‘take it or leave it’ basis. How-
ever, Wiseman et al. (2019) argue that it is essential to ensure that the
terms and conditions of data licences are understandable and trans-
parent, in terms of who has access to the data, who derives the benefits
of data sharing as well as how privacy concerns are addressed.


The article by Regan (2019) identifies a range of risks perceived by
agricultural sector stakeholders in Ireland. These include consumer
rejection of technologies, inequitable distribution of risks and benefits
within the farming community, adverse socio-economic impacts of in-
creased farmer-technology interactions, and ethical threats presented
by the collection and sharing of farmers’ data. Her research demon-
strates how ambiguity can surround the discussion. Based on this as-
sessment, Regan (2019) calls for a reflexive and transdisciplinary per-
spective to anticipate, with key governance actors, the risks of ‘Smart
Farming’ in Ireland, through a responsible innovation approach. This
call for responsible innovation approaches is also echoed by other ar-
ticles within the special issue (e.g. Bronson, 2019; van der Burg et al.,
2019), which in turn has implications for how programmes within the
meso level of AKIS (see section 2.4) organize digital agriculture in-
novation.


3.4. Contributions to the thematic cluster on digitalization and agricultural
knowledge and innovation systems


Another major contribution of this special issue is that it provides a
better conceptual understanding of the digitalization of agricultural
knowledge and innovation systems, in terms of epistemological, onto-
logical and organisational changes and challenges. Here we introduce
the six articles in this thematic cluster, following the distinction be-
tween macro, meso, and micro levels in AKIS as outlined in section 2.4.


At a macro level, Fielke et al. (2019) propose the concept of Digital
Agricultural Innovation Systems (DAIS) to explicitly consider the ele-
ment of digital innovation within innovation systems. They discuss how
this may alter the way innovation is supported by offering new affor-
dances for organizing innovation, both as a generative force and goal of
innovation, and as a transformative force (Nambisan et al., 2019). They
position the concept to support the reflexivity of actors who are de-
veloping digital technologies for farmers through R&D activities. They


argue that the future development of digital technologies will reshape
production, values and understanding in agriculture. Thus, there is a
need to have spaces for reflection on how digitalization will affect in-
novation systems, for example on the acceptability of human-machine
interaction as machines begin to think, learn and make decisions from
their own data-driven experiences through unsupervised machine
learning. In this, the concept of DAIS can also serve as a boundary
object (Tisenkopfs et al., 2015).


The article by Ingram and Gaskell (2019) examines the organisation
of digital knowledge systems and the process of digital co-design, and
reflects on how languages and ontologies matter in terms of accessi-
bility and use of search engines. The article asks the question: ‘How
effective is the process of co-constructing an ontology with experts,
practitioners and other stakeholders in enabling the search for useful
and meaningful knowledge?’ Their analysis shows how involving users
in the design of the user-centred ontology moves the search engine from
an information processing synaptic capacity to a semantic capacity
(beyond current web semantic abilities), where common meaning
concerning specific agricultural domains can be represented and
shared. It proposes that the remaining interpretative differences can be
overcome by building pragmatic capacity and managing knowledge at a
pragmatic boundary through further multiple iterations with users.


Relf-Eckstein et al. (2019) apply the Innovation Opportunity Space
framework to map in detail the innovation pathway taken by an agri-
cultural equipment innovation within the Canadian broadacre farming
system. Their case study details the development of an autonomous
farm equipment innovation named DOT™ by an agriculture equipment
manufacturing firm based in Saskatchewan, Canada. The article ex-
plores three main questions: (i) How are smart farming innovations
enabled or limited by public policy and governance; (ii) How might
smart farming address problems at the farm level, while also reducing
environmental impacts of crop production; and (iii) What are the po-
tential risks associated with smart farming innovations? Their case
study reveals some of the many opportunities and challenges that are
involved in the smart farming innovation space. For instance, oppor-
tunities and benefits include reducing farm input costs (equipment,
fuel, labour) and potential improvements to farmer health, welfare and
safety and improved soil health. Numerous challenges remain though,
including limited regulatory frameworks, both in relation to autono-
mous vehicles as well as the ownership, security and third-party use of
agricultural data and control of the product life cycle of agriculture
equipment. They conclude by observing the need for a reflexive, sys-
tems-level approach to the future of smart farming.


Taking a meso-level perspective, Rijswijk et al. (2019) look at how
agricultural knowledge providers (e.g. research organizations and ad-
visors) in New Zealand perceive and respond to digital agriculture and
digitalization as a whole. Using the concept of organizational identity,
Rijswijk et al. (2019) find digitalization actions in response to digital
agriculture were often ad-hoc, starting with adapting capabilities,
practices and services as their clients and partners require (i.e. focused
on tangible organizational identity). This contrasts with a more stra-
tegic approach, which would involve fundamentally changing organi-
zational values (intangible identity), allowing for more flexibility of
roles and processes and changing business models in order to deal with
uncertainty. Hence, Rijswijk et al. (2019) conclude that knowledge
providers in New Zealand are at early stages of what has been dubbed
‘digi-grasping’ (Dufva and Dufva, 2019). Echoing earlier findings (e.g.
Shepherd et al., 2018), they recommend that AKIS should better sup-
port the development of a digitalization strategy for agricultural
knowledge providers. This improved approach would involve antici-
pating possible futures and reflecting on the consequences of these for
value propositions, business models and organisational identities of
agricultural knowledge providers. This again resonates with calls for
the application of responsible innovation principles, through devel-
oping the reflexivity of AKIS actors about the consequences of digita-
lization of innovation processes.


L. Klerkx, et al.






Looking both at meso-level and micro-level interactions in AKIS,
Ayre et al. (2019) and Eastwood et al. (2019) address more specifically
the consequences of digitalization for one key actor of Agricultural
Knowledge and Innovation Systems: agricultural advisory services.
Following the metaphor introduced to agricultural advisory services by
Labarthe (Labarthe, 2009; Prager et al., 2016), Both Ayre et al. (2019)
and Eastwood et al. (2019) show how digital technologies can impact
on both the front-office activities (new interfaces between farmers and
advisors) and the back-office activities (use of ICTs in R&D). Eastwood
et al. (2019) find that, in relation to front-office activities, advisory
capabilities evolve to include skills related to determining the value
propositions of new technologies. This results in new skills for farmers
and advisors in terms of linking data to better decision-making on farm.
In other words, the advisor becomes a sense-maker of digital data. Back-
office advisory roles may also change, moving from information gath-
ering and implementation of field experiments to remote data compu-
tation and interpretation.


The article by Ayre et al. (2019) demonstrates that creating and
adapting to these new advisory roles is not easy. Digital innovation
presents challenges for both farmers and advisors, due to the new re-
lationships, skills, arrangements, techniques and devices required to
realise value for farm production and profitability from digital tools and
services. Ayre et al. (2019) analyse how a co-design process supported
farm advisers to adapt their routine advisory practices and identify the
value proposition of digital farming tools and services for their and
their clients’ businesses. This co-design process supported an adaptation
of advisory services in both their front-office and back-office dimen-
sions. This process involves finding ways to harness and mobilise di-
verse skills, knowledge, materials and representations for translating
digital data, digital infrastructure and digital capacities into better de-
cisions for farm management. Ayre et al. (2019) use the term ‘digiware’
to capture these unique practices of digital innovation. For instance,
‘digiware’ includes demonstrating digital data quality and digital data
compatibility as well as managing outputs of digital data manipulation
and analysis such as yield maps. ‘Digiware’ also involves: implementing
interpretative frameworks and digital data infrastructures to combine
disparate digital datasets (i.e. spatial and temporal) for integrated
analyses; negotiating new written agreements to enshrine digital data
ownership, controlling and distributing benefits from the use of digital
data; and, capturing and curating satellite and aerial (digital) imagery
and formats (i.e. Global Positioning Systems) of farm attributes such as
weeds and soil.


3.5. Contributions to the thematic cluster on economics and management of
digitalized agricultural production systems and value chains


There are two articles in the thematic cluster on the economics and
management of digitalised agricultural production systems and value
chains. The article by Rojo Gimeno et al. (2019) deals with the as-
sessment of the value of information for precision livestock farming and
thus shares some common themes with the articles by Ayre et al. (2019)
and Eastwood et al. (2019) presented above. Rojo Gimeno et al. (2019)
provide a framework to critically address a key question: does more
precise information derived from using digital technologies result in
improved economic value? The framework proposed in this study
identifies the different steps that occur from data collection until a
decision is taken and effective action yields outcomes with impact on
various criteria. The framework outlines the factors that influence these
different steps. The originality of the article is that it shows how the
value of information can be assessed using economic measures but also
expressed in terms of environmental performance, animal welfare and
health, and social well-being of the decision maker. This study also
highlights that there is no standard value of information: it remains
highly farm specific. As a result, advisory services might still have a key
role to play. New business models could emerge, where advisors’ main
contribution would be to help farmers to interpret whether and how


acquiring more precise information may enhance the value of in-
formation in their specific circumstances.


Phillips et al. (2019) contribute to the literature on what digital
agriculture means in terms of multinational agribusiness firms and
value chain management, by exploring the range of business models
that are emerging in Western Canadian agriculture. Using a typology
that contrasts top-down vs. bottom-up innovation and closed vs. open
platforms, they identify four potential business models: (i) the corpo-
rate model; (ii) strategic networks; (iii) primordial systems; and (iv)
perfect competition or the hacking universe. They find that the first top-
down, corporate model is not widespread, despite being adopted by
multinationals such as John Deere, with vertical coordination and an
integrated business model. Also, they did not find what they call ‘net-
worked activity’ in Canada – open standards systems. They did however
find substantial evidence of local investment, development, adaptation
and adoption of bottom-up efforts, both through entrepreneurial start-
up companies and through platform technologies (in the style of Uber
and AirBnB), which for example connect buyers and sellers of produce
then transact independently of the service. Based on their identification
of these business models, they also point at issues requiring policy at-
tention, such as ownership and control of data, but also identify risks
such as cyberattacks, which may especially affect business models
based on concentrated structures.


4. Future outlook: emerging and new research themes and
questions


In this section we propose a series of topics for future research that
emerge across the five thematic clusters identified in section 2 (with
often multiple cross-relationships). We also offer a wider reflection and
present four potential (new) thematic areas of work, which form an
agenda for future social science research on socio-economic and ethical
aspects of digitalization in agriculture. For each thematic cluster, we
suggest possible research questions to provide inspiration and guide
future studies on these topics, but we realize there may be several other
questions.


4.1. A research agenda to advance the identified thematic clusters


4.1.1. Emerging topics and questions in the thematic cluster of adoption,
uses and adaptation of digital technologies


The special issue articles in the thematic cluster of adoption, uses
and adaptation of digital technologies (Janc et al., 2019; Knierim et al.,
2019) urge us to look deeper into the role of the diversity of farm types,
farming styles, and producer characteristics, in terms of adoption and
adaptation of digital agriculture technologies. This is also related to the
thematic cluster on power, ownership, privacy and ethics in digitalizing
agricultural production systems and value chains and would be needed
to better assess distribution effects. Also building on earlier studies
(Eastwood et al., 2017b; Higgins et al., 2017; Schewe and Stuart, 2015),
an area that could be further explored would deal with adaptation and
learning dynamics after adoption. Furthermore, it could study what co-
evolutionary processes are triggered between digital agricultural tech-
nologies and the context they are embedded in (the farm, the supply
chain, the knowledge system, the policy environment, for example). In
relation to the thematic cluster of digitalizing agricultural knowledge
and innovation systems, this could also assess what type of service
providers assist in what phase and what their contribution is (following
Eastwood et al., 2017b). Possible sets of future research questions in-
clude:


- Who are the beneficiaries and losers following the adoption of di-
gital agriculture technologies in agriculture, and why? How are the
benefits and risks distributed among different actors in the agri-
cultural sector?


- What are the effects of farming scale on the uptake and application


L. Klerkx, et al.






of digital agriculture technologies? Reciprocally, is digitalization
one of the drivers of farm enlargement and capital concentration in
agriculture, allowing for further standardisation and remote mon-
itoring of farm practices? What are the relationships with broader
value chains and food systems?


- How does digital agriculture affect the process of farm innovation,
in terms of the feedback it provides, and the learning and experi-
mentation processes it triggers? What are the implications for
farmers’ learning and experiential knowledge production following
wide scale adoption of digital agriculture technologies?


- How do human and animal systems respond to digital agriculture
artefacts such a sensors and drones and how do they co-evolve?


To explore these questions, well-known theories and models for
assessing individual adoption behaviour, such as diffusion and adoption
theory (Rogers, 1995) or behavioural models (Mills et al., 2017), could
be used. Adoption and adaptation processes could also be explored with
approaches looking at the broader ‘assemblages’ of both human and
non-human actors involved in farm performance and change (Higgins
et al., 2017) as well as the support networks and social capital affecting
adoption and adaptation of digital technologies (Cofré-Bravo et al.,
2019; Oreszczyn et al., 2010).


4.1.2. Emerging topics and questions in the thematic cluster of farmer
identity, farmer skills, and farm work


Considering the thematic cluster on the effects of digitalization on
farmer identity, farmer skills, and farm work, the articles in this special
issue by Vik et al. (2019) and Lioutas et al. (2019) raise several ques-
tions for future empirical analysis. Their articles investigate how big
data may not only facilitate the transformation of the farm, but also
mediate within communities of farmers, between farmers and com-
munities, and between communities and farms, and prompt the de-
velopment of new rules, which in turn may lead to a reorientation of the
division of labour in the agri-food system. Hence, digital agriculture
could be more deeply analysed as one component of the major struc-
tural changes facing the distribution of labour and capital in agri-
culture. This relates to structural changes both within farms (increase in
farm size, in the share of employees in farm labour, etc.), and between
farms (joint corporate farming, etc.), or between farms and other actors
of the supply chain, which could build on and advance earlier critical
analysis mentioned in section 2.2 (e.g. Carolan, 2017b, 2019; Rotz
et al., 2019a). In line with questions on how diversity impacts digital
agriculture technology adoption, Lioutas et al. (2019) suggest this may
play out differently for different types of farms (i.e. horticulture, arable
farms, dairy farms) as they may have different activity systems, and this
would require further research. Other relevant questions in this the-
matic cluster may include:


- What is the performativity of the concepts of Smart Farming, Digital
Agriculture and Agriculture 4.0, for example in terms of implied
dichotomies of ‘Smart Farming’ versus ‘Dumb Farming’, ‘Digital
Agriculture’ versus ‘Analogue Agriculture’, and ‘Farmer 4.0’ versus
‘Farmer 3.0’?


- How do interactions between digital farmer worlds and analogue
farmer worlds lead to development of new farmer identities and
farming style types, e.g. ‘youtubers’, ‘cyborg farmers’, ‘geek
farmers’, ‘joystick farmers’ or ‘drone farmers’?


- What is the influence of social media on farmer identity? How do
farmers perform identity work through social media? How does
social media affect their autonomy, in view of public scrutiny and
policy and supply chain surveillance? How does it change farmers’
communities and the role of leaders within these communities?


- What is the effect of interactions between digital technologies,
plants and animals on farm work? How do plants and animals be-
come ‘digital agents’ and how do they prompt human responses?
What are the affordances of digital technologies towards several


human and non-human actors on farms?
- How is farm work affected by digitalization in terms of farmer skills,
in terms of quality and joy? What deskilling and reskilling processes
are triggered? What is the balance between reliance on digital
knowledge, and on experiential knowledge and intuition? What is
the extent of trust of farmers in information generated by machines?


- What are the implications of digitalization for farm succession, how
does it affect choices of coming generations of farmers and succes-
sion parameters such as investment and future perspectives?


- How does digitalization affect male and female farmers in different
ways? How does it affect gender relationships on farms and in rural
communities?


Topics such as farmer identity and farm work are often investigated
by qualitative methods, consisting of interviews and participant ob-
servation. The new realities of digital agriculture and the abundance of
data they afford enable web and mobile analytics, visualization of large
data sets, machine learning, sentiment analysis and opinion mining,
computer-assisted content analysis, natural language processing, auto-
mated data aggregation and mining, and large social media networks
(Mills, 2018). These new data sources and methods could offer possi-
bilities for doing new sorts of ethnographies or technographies (Jansen
and Vellema, 2011), such as ‘netnography’ (Kozinets, 2010). However,
such analysis is obviously subject to accessibility and personal data
issues, and similar ethical concerns related to power, privacy and data
ownership as those noted by works described under section 2.3, and
would require dedicated research ethics (Glenna et al., 2019).


4.1.3. Emerging topics and questions in the thematic cluster of power,
ownership, privacy and ethics in agricultural production systems and value
chains


The articles from the special issue connected to the thematic cluster
of power, ownership, privacy and ethics in agricultural production
systems and value chains clearly point out the need for reflection on
power, values and ethics. For example, on the basis of their extensive
review, Van der Burg et al. (2019) raise four important areas of future
research: 1) investigating the societal role of farms, thus broadening the
imagination of stakeholders about the possible other goals that smart
farming could serve, and enhancing their reflection about their relative
value; 2) reflection on the epistemological choices that are made in the
selection of data, the ways in which meaningful connections are made
between them and how they are interpreted (echoing suggestions by
Bronson, 2019); 3) understanding the preconditions for trust between
stakeholders who have a role in smart farming and who engage in a
relationship together when they become members in a data sharing
network (an issue also raised by Jakku et al., 2019; Wiseman et al.,
2019); and 4) scrutiny of codes of conduct, as it is unclear how current
regulation could satisfactorily combine the private and societal goals
that smart farming is intended to serve. Regan (2019) adds to this the
importance of looking at issues such as perceived uncertainty and risk.
Most of the authors in this thematic cluster point to the need for re-
sponsible research and innovation. Based on the insights from articles
in this special issue, as well as a wider reflection by the authors of this
article, future research could explore topics such as the role of values in
digital agriculture design, the organisation and governance of data and
the application of responsible innovation principles. For instance, ex-
amples of specific questions could include:


- How do the values of different stakeholders in the digital agriculture
design processes differ?


- What are the broader societal or public interests that digital agri-
culture should fulfil, and what are potential trade-offs with private
interests? The issue of digitalization may be integrated into the
current debates over the effects of new institutional arrangements,
such as the Public-Private-Partnerships (PPP), on the integration of
societal issues and empowerment or further privatisation of public


L. Klerkx, et al.






goods (Wettenhall, 2003; Sclar, 2015).
- What sort of governance responses emerge, for example in relation
to surveillance through digital technologies?


- What are the forms of resistance within or against digitalization?
Furthering earlier work by Carolan (2018c), how do novel grass-
roots and corporate organisational responses emerge around Big
Data and the Internet of Things, such as Right to Repair, Farm Hack
and Data Cooperatives, and how do they function? How localised or
global are such grassroots and corporate organisational arrange-
ments and how do they influence decision making in value chains?


- How do different policy or governance models either hinder or en-
able the development of trust between actors? How do digital
technologies increase or decrease power and information asymme-
tries?


- How can principles of responsible innovation help different actors
deal with the ‘unknowns’ and ‘unseens’ related to digital agri-
culture? What are the uncertainties and risks perceived by different
actors? How are these contemplated in actual RRI processes? What
are considered the ‘digital game changers’ (following Brunori et al.,
2019)?


In terms of research approaches and theories, following the earlier
work by scholars in the fields of rural sociology and science and tech-
nology studies, discussed in section 2.3, there is ample scope here for
political economy and political ecology approaches, as well as practice
theory and social movement theory, to unravel the ‘digital food re-
gimes’ (as per the term introduced by Burch and Lawrence, 2009;
McMichael, 2005). Feminist and post-structuralist Foucauldian theory
and Latourian actor-network theory can also contribute to identifying
power relations. Critical discourse studies could also help with un-
ravelling the values and tacit assumptions of different stakeholders and
how these are negotiated in interaction. The emerging field of digital
sociology (Lupton, 2014) brings together a variety of analytical lenses
from contemporary social and cultural theory, which can help in-
vestigate the kinds of assemblages that are configured through digital
technology use and encourage reflection on the implications and con-
sequences of such use, including social dynamics relating to the in-
creasing pervasiveness of digital surveillance in everyday life.


4.1.4. Emerging topics and questions in the thematic cluster of digital
knowledge and innovation systems


Regarding the thematic cluster of digital knowledge and innovation
systems, several articles in the special issue (Ayre et al., 2019; Fielke
et al., 2019 and Rijswijk et al., 2019) introduce new and perhaps ten-
tative concepts to better understand digitalizing AKIS, such as ‘digi-
ware’ (Ayre et al., 2019), ‘Digital Agricultural Innovation Systems’
(Fielke et al., 2019) and ‘digi-grasping’ (Dufva and Dufva, 2019;
Rijswijk et al., 2019. Further developing these concepts will be a major
task for future conceptual and empirical work. Future work should look
at both macro, meso and micro levels in AKIS, and questions may in-
clude:


- In view of ideas coined around ‘agriculture 4.0’, which encompasses
several other technologies in connection with digital technologies
(e.g. nanotechnologies, gene editing, ‘omics’, synthetic foods), and
what that implies for organizing cross-sectoral innovation (Pigford
et al., 2018; Rose and Chilvers, 2018), how do traditional and non-
traditional players (e.g. silicon valley style tech companies) in the
agri-food sectors collaborate? What is the role of new AKIS players
(e.g. tech firms) on local and global innovation dynamics? What
does this mean for the inclusion of different sorts of knowledges in
agri-food innovation?


- What models of future agricultural production (e.g. agro-ecology,
sustainable intensification, circular agriculture, vertical agriculture)
are supported by digital AKIS and what models are not? How does
digitalization change the functioning of agricultural R&D, its routine


for experimenting and assessing the potential of new technologies
for farmers? Can virtual models or digital twins, and Big Data re-
place field experimentation?


- How does digitalization affect the sector specificity of AKIS? How is
it transformed by and integrated in the development of more generic
technologies, ranging from social media through to block chains?


- In relation to new modes of governance, including interactive digital
innovation, what new forms of digital learning and innovation
spaces emerge (e.g. public-private partnerships through Digital
Innovation Hubs, Digital Living Labs, Data Cooperatives, Hacker
Spaces and open source innovation, rural FabLabs and
Makerspaces)? What goals do they have, what methodologies do
they use, and what is their effect on innovation processes? How do
citizen science-based and social network-based exchanges of data
and information shape farm innovation?


- In relation to digital agriculture adoption and adaptation, how are
new roles, functions, and identities of agricultural researchers and
advisors shaped? What roles do they take in (big) data gathering,
aggregation, curation, sensemaking, and application? How are
processes of analogue and digital unlearning/deskilling – learning/
reskilling managed by advisory services? What new advisory and
research organizational structures and business models emerge as a
result and how does this affect advisor and research capabilities and
training? What autonomous innovation forces do machines ex-
ercise?


In order to empirically research digital AKIS, existing frameworks
such as functional-structural innovation systems analysis could be used
to map digital AKIS within countries, but also across borders (Turner
et al., 2016; Wieczorek and Hekkert, 2012). Certain technologies have
now been developed for long enough to trace back their technological
innovation systems and provide historical insights on how they im-
pacted agricultural R&D (in line with Eastwood et al., 2017b). Methods
for researching online activity could also be used to map information
exchange and learning dynamics, as well as other data science methods
mentioned already above. Following Nambisan et al. (2019), this could
enable a different sort of social science capable of better grasping the
potentially different innovation dynamics afforded by digital agri-
culture.


4.1.5. Emerging topics and questions in the thematic cluster of economics
and management of digitalized agricultural production systems and value
chains


In terms of the last thematic cluster identified, economics and
management of digitalized agricultural production systems and value
chains, the article in this special issue by Phillips et al. (2019) has made
evident that we need more systematic mapping of emerging business
models, to help see how local or global these are, and identify what
advantages and risks come with each model. Furthermore, following
the review by Rojo Gimeno et al. (2019), we need new sets of questions
to assess:


- What are some of the emerging models for value-adding and bro-
kering of data and what opportunities do these create for different
actors?


- What are the effects on distribution or labour and capital in agri-
culture, both within farms (e.g. increase in farm size, in the share of
employees in farm labour, etc.), between farms (joint corporate
farming, etc.) or between farms and other actors of the supply
chain?


- How does digitalization affect interactions between value chain
players (e.g. input suppliers, intermediaries, traders, retailers) in
terms of contracts, trust and transaction costs, through for instance
implementation of platform technologies, Internet of Things and
Artifical Intelligence?


L. Klerkx, et al.






Economics and management sciences can make many analytical
contributions to policy, farm management, supply chain, consumer
demand and sustainability issues (Coble et al., 2018), using the variety
of methods they employ. Approaches from economics and marketing of
innovation (Desmarchelier et al., 2013) and production organisation
specific to services (and more precisely to Knowledge Intensive Business
Services - Lusch et al., 2007) might usefully be applied to agriculture (as
done earlier by Klerkx and Proctor, 2013)). This could involve applying
the case studies approach to new business models, to understand how
actors create value out of agricultural data. Another useful avenue of
enquiry would be to develop more quantitative approaches in this
context, which have proven their value in other sectors, such as sta-
tistical analysis of systematic surveys on firm innovation (Cainelli et al.,
2004).


4.2. A research agenda in potential future clusters of research


We have outlined, following the established and emerging thematic
clusters of research, several questions for future research. However,
there seems to be areas that are underdeveloped and could form new
thematic clusters of social science research on digitalization in agri-
culture.


4.2.1. Digital agriculture social systems conceptualizations: towards cyber-
physical-socio-ecological systems?


Whereas some authors reflect on the need for inclusion of social
systems in conceptualizations of digital agriculture, such as cyber
physical systems (Wolfert et al., 2017), or the ‘socio-cyber-physical
systems’ that Lioutas et al. (2019) refer to in their article for the special
issue, this seems an underdeveloped area. As digital agriculture enables
multiple new material, spatial and temporal flows, this area could
benefit from conceptual reflection and empirical studies. It could draw
on bodies of work looking at socio-technical systems (Bijker, 1995), or
as mentioned earlier use assemblage theory, as Carolan and Higgins and
colleagues have already applied or suggested (Carolan, 2017a; Higgins
et al., 2017), or activity systems theory (Lioutas et al., 2019). Other
related concepts that could be useful include ‘socio-technological-eco-
logical systems’ (McPhearson et al., 2016), or connecting digital
transformation with ideas on ‘innovation ecosystems’ (Pigford et al.,
2018) or ‘nature based innovation systems’ (Van der Jagt et al., 2019).
Another relevant concept could be ‘telecoupling’ between geo-
graphically distant but nonetheless connected human and ecological
worlds (Hull and Liu, 2018; Liu et al., 2013), or what has been called a
‘sociology of flows’ (Oosterveer, 2015). Empirical but also philosophical
questions could include:


- What kinds of new socio-cyber-physical connections are made
through digital agriculture and smart value chains and food systems,
and what kind of feedback mechanisms do they engender? How do
new modes of information exchange between farmers and their
environment influence structural change, for example, in terms of
how fields are set up and agricultural landscapes are shaped?


- How do digital agricultural systems create new links between hu-
mans and the farming environment, and how does this feed back
into human systems (motorial, cognitive). For example, what is the
effect of new spatial dimensions provided by drones and augmented
reality, new tactile and motorial dimensions provided by automa-
tion/robots, and what cognitive dimensions are triggered by artifi-
cial intelligence?


- How do digital twins foster learning and experimentation with new
sorts of human- technology-natural environment interactions?


- What are the limits of digital technologies in terms of human values
and willingness to integrated with machines, following concepts
such as the ‘quantified self’ and ‘digitally enhanced humans’? Also,
following Holy-Luczaj and Blok (2019), what are the moral and


ethical consequences of hybrid entities combining digital farming
technologies and natural ecosystem elements, crossing the ontolo-
gical binarism of naturalness and artificiality?


4.2.2. Digitally enabled agricultural transition pathways
While digital technologies have become pervasive, their role in


transitions towards sustainability remain understudied. Digital agri-
cultural technologies have often been suggested as potentially con-
tributing to realizing more sustainable practices (El Bilali and Allahyari,
2018a), but have hardly been studied as part of transition dynamics.
Following Köhler et al. (2019), we think that digitalization as a trans-
formative force needs much more attention. Also, so far, the literature
does not often focus on how digital agriculture links to diverse future
models of agriculture, which tend to co-exist (Gaitán-Cremaschi et al.,
2019; Pigford et al., 2018; Plumecocq et al., 2018). Most authors doing
critical analysis see digital agriculture as reinforcing neoliberal in-
dustrialized agricultural production systems and food systems (e.g.
Bronson and Knezevic, 2016, 2019; Carolan, 2017b, 2018a,c, 2019a).
However, some authors consider it a possible way to enhance agro-
ecological models (Bellon-Maurel and Huyghe, 2017; Dumont et al.,
2018; Leveau et al., 2019; Van Hulst et al., 2020). Empirical questions
include:


- What are the roles of digital technology as a change agent? How
does it enable actors in the agri-food sector to foster change? How
does it support alternative ‘sustainable niches’, how does it disturb
or reinforce incumbent ‘food regimes’?


- How do digital technologies relate to different paradigms in agri-
culture that coexist or compete, such as organic farming, agro-
ecology, bio-economy, regenerative agriculture, urban agriculture,
vertical agriculture?


4.2.3. Digital agricultural policy making
Some research has been done with the intention to inform agri-


cultural policies (Jouanjean, 2019; Soma et al., 2019; World Bank,
2017; World Bank, 2019; EU SCAR AKIS, 2019), and is the focus of
many reflections and recommendations in earlier work (Lele and
Goswami, 2017; Bronson, 2018; Bronson and Knezevic, 2019;
Carbonell, 2016;). However, there are still limited accounts of policy
and law-making processes, for example in relation to data ownership
regulations, with some exceptions (Sanderson et al., 2018; Trendov
et al., 2019). This is an area that could receive more attention, for ex-
ample from the disciplines of political science and law. Here empirical
questions could include:


- How does digital agriculture feed data into real-time policy making?
What distributive effects does such data and algorithm-informed
agricultural policy have?


- How is the notion of segmentation of target audiences of policies
affected by digitalization (small vs. big farms, young farmers,
gender issues, etc.)? How do policy makers respond to counteract
negative impacts of digital agriculture, such as concentration of
power and risk of cyber-attacks on the food system?


- How do agricultural public policy makers and politicians operate in
political arenas with large information technology companies and
agri-tech firms? How does digital agriculture relate to the fi-
nancialization and corporatization of agriculture, and what policy
responses can be witnessed to counteract potential negative effects?


- What policy discourses around digital agriculture emerge, and how
are they used in food policy and innovation policy debates?


- How is the nature of policy instruments itself framed or restricted by
technologies? For instance, is there a risk that farmers’ subsidies are
restricted to support practices that can be monitored using remote
methods (satellites images, censors, etc.), to the detriment of more
systemic practices?


L. Klerkx, et al.






4.2.4. The global geography of digital agriculture development: social
dynamics related to digital agriculture in developing and emerging countries


Digital agriculture is also heavily promoted in the global south, and
multiple studies have documented experiences and lessons so far, in
relation to market information systems and advisory provisioning
through mobile phone apps for example, as well as agricultural citizen
science (Aker, 2011; Barreto and Amaral, 2018; Baumüller, 2016, 2017;
Lele and Goswami, 2017; Cieslik et al., 2018; Ezeomah and Duncombe,
2019; Munthali et al., 2018; World Bank, 2017; Trendov et al., 2019;
Jouanjean, 2019). However, critical social science studies seem to be
empirically biased towards the Global North (North America, Europe)
and developed countries in the Global South (Australia, New Zealand).
It has therefore been suggested that a critical approach towards the
pervasive application of digital technologies in developing and emer-
ging country agriculture is much needed (Cieslik et al., 2018; Mann,
2018; Sulaiman V. et al., 2012). This is because digital agricultural
technology is not context neutral (Eastwood et al., 2017b), but needs to
be unpacked, situated, reconfigured, and supported by a local, context-
sensitive support infrastructure (Glover et al., 2019, 2017; Marin et al.,
2015). As agriculture is a sector where both the organisation of pro-
duction, the innovation dynamics and policy have been often developed
within national trajectories, but also have global dimensions through
interconnected value chains, it is critical to assess the development of
digital agriculture around the globe through the lenses provided by the
different thematic clusters (established, emerging, and potential). This
could help answering questions such as:


- How do digital agricultural technologies travel and how are they
translated to different contexts? What is the role of national digital
agriculture technological innovation systems in relation to global
digital agriculture technological innovation systems in processes of
technology generation and diffusion, and adoption and adaptation?


- What is the role of global technology providers, local technology
firms and public-private partnerships? What types of frugal digital
innovations emerge? What is the role of upcoming nations, such as
China, India, Brazil and Chile, in terms of digital agricultural tech-
nology, and how does this influence digital agriculture technology
markets?


- What is the role of donor discourse in digitalization of agriculture?
How does this discourse include or exclude local values towards
agriculture?


- How do ethical values regarding digital agriculture (e.g. data own-
ership, privacy, farmer and animal autonomy) come to expression in
different contexts? How is digital agriculture regulated in different
contexts?


5. Conclusion


This review and introductory article to the special issue has pro-
vided an overview of thematic clusters of social science research on
digital agriculture, thereby showing this is a burgeoning field that
provides important insights for the policy and practice of digital agri-
culture. Being an exploratory review, while summarizing earlier strands
of work, this article has not systemically analysed, compared, and
synthesized the evidence in the different thematic clusters of social
science on digital agriculture. This calls for future studies taking a
systematic review approach.


The studies in this special issue add to the five thematic clusters, by
showing recent responses in terms of policies, practices, and institu-
tional arrangements to embed digital agriculture in different sectors
and countries, such as new AKIS arrangements and changing organi-
zational identities, and new business models and policy responses.
Beyond summarizing the findings from the studies in the special issue,
this article has drawn out an agenda for future research by suggesting
new questions in the five thematic clusters identified. Furthermore, we
have articulated four new thematic fields: 1) digital agriculture social


systems conceptualizations; 2) digital agriculture policy processes; 3)
digitally enabled agricultural transition pathways; and 4) global geo-
graphy of digital agriculture development.


While we have shown the diversity of social science perspectives
employed so far, and their complementarity, we believe there is more
scope for interdisciplinary as well as transdisciplinary work.
Interdisciplinarity as well as transdisciplinarity can help enrich our
understanding of the specific institutional contexts and stakeholder
dynamics in which digital innovations are developed and what they
might impact (Taebi et al., 2014). There is also scope for methodolo-
gical innovation, moving from an analogue social science to digital
social science or social data science, because as Roth et al (2019) argue
quite strongly, computer illiterate social scientists produce analogue
theories of digital societies.


The diversity of new questions presented in this article shows that
there are many possible lines of enquiry across and between different
social science and natural and technical science disciplines. As digital
agriculture increasingly moves beyond prototype and hype stages, there
will be ample opportunity to empirically address these questions and
identify many others. In doing so, social science research in conjunction
with natural or technical sciences can help to guide the development of
digital agriculture in ways that consider and respond to social dy-
namics, thus trying to enhance the benefits and mitigate the potential
negative consequences of these emerging technologies.


Conflict of interest


The authors state they have no conflict of interest.


Acknowledgements


We thank Editor-in-Chief Sietze Vellema for his support in realizing
this special issue, and all the reviewers of the special issue articles. We
also thank the reviewers for their comments which helped improve this
introductory review article. The reflection leading to the research
agenda has benefited from productive interactions and stimulating
discussions with colleagues from the AgResearch NZBIDA programme,
the DigiMetis network of Wageningen University and Research,
Working Group 1 at the 2019 conference of the European Society for
Rural Sociology, and the #DigitAg programme. We gratefully ac-
knowledge the support of the Knowledge, Technology and Innovation
Group of Wageningen University, the CSIRO Digiscape Future Science
Platform, and INRA UMR AGIR for enabling the authors to act as guest
editors for this special issue and the open access publication of this
article.


References


Alm, E., Colliander, N., Lind, F., Stohne, V., Sundström, O., Wilms, M., Smits, M., 2016.
Digitizing the Netherlands: How the Netherlands Can Drive and Benefit From an
Accelerated Digitized Economy in Europe. Boston Consulting Group.


Agyekumhene, C., de Vries, J.R., van Paassen, A., Macnaghten, P., Schut, M., Bregt, A.,
2018. Digital platforms for smallholder credit access: the mediation of trust for co-
operation in maize value chain financing. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. 86–87,
77–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2018.06.001.


Aker, J.C., 2011. Dial “A” for agriculture: a review of information and communication
technologies for agricultural extension in developing countries. Agric. Econ. 42,
631–647.


Andreopoulou, Z., Tsekouropoulos, G., Koutroumanidis, T., Vlachopoulou, M., Manos, B.,
2008. Typology for e-business activities in the agricultural sector. Int. J. Bus. Inf. Syst.
3, 231. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2008.01728.


Annosi, M.C., Brunetta, F., Monti, A., Nat, F., 2019. Is the trend your friend? An analysis
of technology 4.0 investment decisions in agricultural SMEs. Comput. Ind. 109,
59–71.


Antle, J.M., Jones, J.W., Rosenzweig, C.E., 2017. Next generation agricultural system
data, models and knowledge products: introduction. Agric. Syst. 155, 186–190.


Ayre, M., Mc Collum, V., Waters, W., Samson, P., Curro, A., Nettle, R., Paschen, J.-A.,
King, B., Reichelt, N., 2019. Supporting and practising digital innovation with ad-
visers in smart farming. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
njas.2019.05.001.


Balafoutis, A., Beck, B., Fountas, S., Vangeyte, J., Van Der Wal, T., Soto, I., Gómez-


L. Klerkx, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2018.06.001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0015

https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2008.01728

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0030

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.05.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.05.001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0040




Barbero, M., Barnes, A., Eory, V., 2017. Precision agriculture technologies positively
contributing to ghg emissions mitigation, farm productivity and economics.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 9 (8), 1339.


Banhazi, T.M., Lehr, H., Black, J.L., Crabtree, H., Schofield, P., Tscharke, M., Berckmans,
D., 2012. Precision Livestock Farming: an international review of scientific and
commercial aspects. Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 5.


Barnes, A., De Soto, I., Eory, V., Beck, B., Balafoutis, A., Sánchez, B., Vangeyte, J.,
Fountas, S., van der Wal, T., Gómez-Barbero, M., 2019. Influencing factors and in-
centives on the intention to adopt precision agricultural technologies within arable
farming systems. Environ. Sci. Policy 93, 66–74.


Barreto, L., Amaral, A., 2018. Smart Farming: Cyber Security Challenges C3-9th
International Conference on Intelligent Systems 2018: Theory, Research and
Innovation in Applications, IS 2018 - Proceedings. pp. 870–876.


Baumüller, H., 2016. Agricultural service delivery through Mobile phones: local in-
novation and technological opportunities in Kenya. In: Gatzweiler, W.F., von Braun,
J. (Eds.), Technological and Institutional Innovations for Marginalized Smallholders
in Agricultural Development. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 143–162.


Baumüller, H., 2017. The little we know: an exploratory literature review on the utility of
mobile phone‐enabled services for smallholder farmers. J. Int. Dev. 30, 134–154.


Bear, C., Holloway, L., 2015. Country life: agricultural technologies and the emergence of
new rural subjectivities. Geogr. Compass 9, 303–315.


Bear, C., Holloway, L., 2019. Beyond resistance: geographies of divergent more-than-
human conduct in robotic milking. Geoforum 104, 212–221.


Bechtet, N., 2019. The role of extension services in the adoption of innovation by farmers.
In: The Case of Precision Farming Tools for Fertilization, Noemie Bechtet. Presented
at the 24th European Seminar on Extension Education, 18–21 June 2019, Acireale,
Sicily, Italy.


Bellon-Maurel, V., Huyghe, C., 2016. L’innovation technologique dans l’agriculture.
Goconomie 80, 159–180.


Bellon-Maurel, V., Huyghe, C., 2017. Putting agricultural equipment and digital tech-
nologies at the cutting edge of agroecology. OCL - Oilseeds and fats, Crops and
Lipids 24.


Bijker, W.E., 1995. Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs : Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical
Change. MIT Press, Cambridge.


Blok, V., 2018. Technocratic Management Versus Ethical Leadership Redefining
Responsible Professionalism in the Agri-Food Sector in the Anthropocene. J. Agric.
Environ. Ethics 31, 583–591.


Blok, V., Gremmen, B., 2018. Agricultural technologies as living machines: toward a
biomimetic conceptualization of smart farming technologies. Ethics Policy Environ.
21, 246–263.


Boehlje, M., 2016. How might big data impact industry structure and enhance margins?
Int. Food Agribusiness Manage. Rev. 19 (A), 13–16.


Borchers, M.R., Bewley, J.M., 2015. An assessment of producer precision dairy farming
technology use, prepurchase considerations, and usefulness. J. Dairy Sci. 98,
4198–4205.


Bos, J., Munnichs, G., 2016. Digitization of Animals - Exploration of Precision Livestock
Farming. Rathenau Institute, Hague.


Bramley, R., 2009. Lessons from nearly 20 years of Precision Agriculture research, de-
velopment, and adoption as a guide to its appropriate application. Crop Pasture Sci.
60, 197–217.


Bronson, K., 2018. Smart farming: including rights holders for responsible agricultural
innovation. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 8 (2), 7–14.


Bronson, K., 2019. Looking through a responsible innovation lens at uneven engagements
with digital farming. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.
2019.03.001.


Bronson, K., Knezevic, I., 2016. Big Data in food and agriculture. Big Data Soc. 3,
2053951716648174.


Bronson, K., Knezevic, I., 2019. The digital divide and how it matters for Canadian food
system equity. Can. J. Commun. 44, 63–68.


Brunori, G., Klerkx, L., Townsend, L., Dessein, J., Del Mar Delgado, M., Kotarakos, C.,
Nieto, E., Scotti, I., 2019. Favilli. Promoting Adaptive Capacity in the Digitisation
Process of Rural Areas: the DESIRA Methodology. in: Book of Abstracts, p. 6, XXVIII
European Society for Rural Sociology Congress “Rural Futures in a Complex World”
Trondheim, Norway June 25–28.


Burch, D., Lawrence, G., 2009. Towards a third food regime: behind the transformation.
Agric. Human Values 26, 267–279.


Burton, R.J.F., Peoples, S., Cooper, M.H., 2012. Building ‘cowshed cultures’: a cultural
perspective on the promotion of stockmanship and animal welfare on dairy farms. J.
Rural Stud. 28, 174–187.


Burton, R.J.F., Riley, M., 2018. Traditional Ecological Knowledge from the internet? The
case of hay meadows in Europe. Land Use Policy 70, 334–346.


Busse, M., Schwerdtner, W., Siebert, R., Doernberg, A., Kuntosch, A., König, B.,
Bokelmann, W., 2015. Analysis of animal monitoring technologies in Germany from
an innovation system perspective. Agric. Syst. 138, 55–65.


Butler, D., Holloway, L., 2016. Technology and restructuring the social field of dairy
farming: hybrid capitals, ‘Stockmanship’ and automatic milking systems. Sociol.
Ruralis 56, 513–530.


Cainelli, G., Evangelista, R., Savona, M., 2004. The impact of innovation on economic
performance in services. Serv. Ind. J. 24 (1), 116–130.


Carbonell, I.M., 2016. The ethics of big data in big agriculture. Internet Policy Review 5,
1–13.


Carolan, M., 2017a. Agro-digital governance and life itself: food politics at the intersec-
tion of code and affect. Sociol. Ruralis 57, 816–835.


Carolan, M., 2017b. Publicising food: big data, precision agriculture, and Co-experimental
techniques of addition. Sociol. Ruralis 57, 135–154.


Carolan, M., 2018a. Big data and food retail: nudging out citizens by creating dependent


consumers. Geoforum 90, 142–150.
Carolan, M., 2018b. The Politics of Big Data: Corporate Agri-food Governance Meets


“weak” Resistance, Agri-environmental Governance As an Assemblage: Multiplicity,
Power, and Transformation. pp. 195–212.


Carolan, M., 2018c. ‘Smart’ farming techniques as political ontology: access, sovereignty
and the performance of neoliberal and not-so-Neoliberal worlds. Sociol. Ruralis 58,
745–764.


Carolan, M., 2019. Automated agrifood futures: robotics, labor and the distributive pol-
itics of digital agriculture. J. Peasant Stud. https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2019.
1584189.


Chowdhury, A., Hambly Odame, H., 2013. Social media for enhancing innovation in agri-
food and rural development: current dynamics in Ontario, Canada. The Journal of
Rural Communiy Development 8, 97–119.


Cieslik, K.J., Leeuwis, C., Dewulf, A.R.P.J., Lie, R., Werners, S.E., van Wessel, M., Feindt,
P., Struik, P.C., 2018. Addressing socio-ecological development challenges in the
digital age: exploring the potential of Environmental Virtual Observatories for
Connective Action (EVOCA). Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. 86–87, 2–11.


Coble, K.H., Mishra, A.K., Ferrell, S., Griffin, T., 2018. Big data in agriculture: a challenge
for the future. Appl. Econ. Perspect. Policy 40, 79–96.


Cofré-Bravo, G., Klerkx, L., Engler, A., 2019. Combinations of bonding, bridging, and
linking social capital for farm innovation: how farmers configure different support
networks. J. Rural Stud. 69, 53–64.


Daum, T., Buchwald, H., Gerlicher, A., Birner, R., 2018. Smartphone apps as a new
method to collect data on smallholder farming systems in the digital age: a case study
from Zambia. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 144.


David-Benz, H., Andriandralambo, N., Rahelizatovo, N., 2017. Disseminating Price
Information Through Mobile Phone: Are Malagasy Farmers Ready for It? Presented at
the Conference Proceedings of 2017 EFITA WCCA Congress: European Conference
Dedicated to the Future Use of ICT in the Agri-food Sector, Bioresource and Biomass
Sector. Montpellier, France.-150. .


Dawkins, M.S., 2017. Animal welfare and efficient farming: Is conflict inevitable? Anim.
Prod. Sci. 57 (2), 201–208. https://doi.org/10.1071/AN15383.


de Amorim, W.S., Borchardt Deggau, A., do Livramento Gonçalves, G., da Silva Neiva, S.,
Prasath, A.R., Salgueirinho Osório de Andrade Guerra, J.B., 2019. Urban challenges
and opportunities to promote sustainable food security through smart cities and the
4th industrial revolution. Land Use Policy 87, 104065.


Desmarchelier, B., Djellal, F., Gallouj, F., 2013. Knowledge intensive business services
and long term growth. Struct. Chang. Econ. Dyn. 25, 188–205.


Di Silvestre, M.L., Favuzza, S., Riva Sanseverino, E., Zizzo, G., 2018. How
Decarbonization, Digitalization and Decentralization are changing key power infra-
structures. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 93, 483–498.


Dick, A., Bhandari, B., Prakash, S., 2019. 3D printing of meat. Meat Sci. 153, 35–44.
Driessen, C., Heutinck, L., 2015. Cows desiring to be milked? Milking robots and the co-


evolution of ethics and technology on Dutch dairy farms. Agric. Human Values 32,
3–20.


Dufva, T., Dufva, M., 2019. Grasping the future of the digital society. Futures 107, 17–28.
Dumont, B., Groot, J.C.J., Tichit, M., 2018. Review: Make ruminants green again - how


can sustainable intensification and agroecology converge for a better future? Animal
12, S210–S219.


Eastwood, C.R., Chapman, D.F., Paine, M.S., 2012. Networks of practice for co-con-
struction of agricultural decision support systems: case studies of precision dairy
farms in Australia. Agric. Syst. 108, 10–18.


Eastwood, C., Klerkx, L., Ayre, M., et al., 2017a. Managing socio-ethical challenges in the
development of smart farming: from a fragmented to a comprehensive approach for
responsible research and innovation. J. Agric. Environ. Ethics. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10806-017-9704-5.


Eastwood, C., Klerkx, L., Nettle, R., 2017b. Dynamics and distribution of public and
private research and extension roles for technological innovation and diffusion: case
studies of the implementation and adaptation of precision farming technologies. J.
Rural Stud. 49, 1–12.


Eastwood, C., Ayre, M., Nettle, R., Dela Rue, B., 2019. Making sense in the cloud: farm
advisory services in a smart farming future. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.004.


Eichler Inwood, S.E., Dale, V.H., 2019. State of apps targeting management for sustain-
ability of agricultural landscapes. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 39, 8.


El Bilali, H., Allahyari, M.S., 2018a. Transition towards sustainability in agriculture and
food systems: role of information and communication technologies. Inf. Process.
Agric. 5, 456–464.


Ezeomah, B., Duncombe, R., 2019. The Role of Digital Platforms in Disrupting
Agricultural Value Chains in Developing Countries, IFIP Advances in Information and
Communication Technology. pp. 231–247.


EU SCAR AKIS, 2019. Preparing for Future AKIS in Europe. Brussels, European
Commission.


Fielke, S.J., Garrard, R., Jakku, E., Fleming, A., Wiseman, L., Taylor, B.M., 2019.
Conceptualising the DAIS: implications of the ‘Digitalisation of Agricultural
Innovation Systems’ on technology and policy at multiple levels. Njas - Wageningen
J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.002.


Fleming, A., Jakku, E., Lim-Camacho, L., Taylor, B., Thorburn, P., 2018. Is big data for big
farming or for everyone? Perceptions in the Australian grains industry. Agron.
Sustain. Dev. 38, 24.


Fountas, S., Blackmore, S., Ess, D., Hawkins, S., Blumhoff, G., Lowenberg-Deboer, J.,
Sorensen, C.G., 2005. Farmer experience with precision agriculture in Denmark and
the US Eastern Corn Belt. Precis. Agric. 6, 121–141.


Fraser, A., 2019a. The digital revolution, data curation, and the new dynamics of food
sovereignty construction. J. Peasant Stud. 1–19.


Fraser, A., 2019b. Land grab/data grab: precision agriculture and its new horizons. J.


L. Klerkx, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0130

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.03.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.03.001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0210

https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2019.1584189

https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2019.1584189

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0245

https://doi.org/10.1071/AN15383

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0290

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-017-9704-5

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-017-9704-5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0300

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0325

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0350




Peasant Stud. 46, 893–912.
Freidberg, S., 2019. “Unable to determine”: limits to metrical governance in agricultural


supply chains. Sci. Technol. Human Values, 0162243919870234.
Gaitán-Cremaschi, D., Klerkx, L., Duncan, J., Trienekens, J.H., Huenchuleo, C., Dogliotti,


S., Contesse, M.E., Rossing, W.A.H., 2019. Characterizing diversity of food systems in
view of sustainability transitions. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 39, 1.


Galliano, D., Gonçalves, A., Triboulet, P., 2017. Eco-innovations in rural territories: or-
ganizational dynamics and resource mobilization in low density areas. Journal of
Innovation Economics Management 2017, 35–62.


Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N.M., Hultink, E.J., 2017. The Circular Economy–A
new sustainability paradigm? J. Clean. Prod. 143, 757–768.


Glenna, L., Hesse, A., Hinrichs, C., Chiles, R., Sachs, C., 2019. Qualitative research ethics
in the big-data era. Am. Behav. Sci. 63, 555–559.


Glover, D., Sumberg, J., Ton, G., Andersson, J., Badstue, L., 2019. Rethinking technolo-
gical change in smallholder agriculture. Outlook Agric. 48 (3), 169–180.


Glover, D., Venot, J.P., Maat, H., 2017. On the movement of agricultural technologies:
packaging, unpacking and situated reconfiguration. In: Sumberg, J. (Ed.), Agronomy
for Development: The Politics of Knowledge in Agricultural Research. Routledge,
London, pp. 14–30.


Hansen, B.G., 2015. Robotic milking-farmer experiences and adoption rate in Jæren,
Norway. J. Rural Stud. 41, 109–117.


Hay, R., Pearce, P., 2014. Technology adoption by rural women in Queensland, Australia:
women driving technology from the homestead for the paddock. J. Rural Stud. 36,
318–327.


Higgins, V., Bryant, M., Howell, A., Battersby, J., 2017. Ordering adoption: materiality,
knowledge and farmer engagement with precision agriculture technologies. J. Rural
Stud. 55, 193–202.


Holy-Luczaj, M., Blok, V., 2019. Hybrids and the boundaries of moral considerability or
revisiting the idea of non-instrumental value. Philos. Technol. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s13347-019-00380-9.


Hull, V., Liu, J., 2018. Telecoupling: a new frontier for global sustainability. Ecol. Soc. 23
(4), 41.


Hunt, E.R., Daughtry, C.S.T., 2018. What good are unmanned aircraft systems for agri-
cultural remote sensing and precision agriculture? Int. J. Remote Sens. 39,
5345–5376.


Ingram, J., Gaskell, P., 2019. Searching for meaning: co-constructing ontologies with
stakeholders for smarter search engines in agriculture. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.006.


Islam, M.S., Grönlund, A., 2010. An agricultural market information service (AMIS) in
Bangladesh: evaluating a mobile phone based e-service in a rural context. Inf. Dev.
26, 289–302. https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666910385556.


Jakku, E., Taylor, B., Fleming, A., Mason, C., Fielke, S., Sounness, C., Thorburn, P., 2019.
“If they don’t tell us what they do with it, why would we trust them?” Trust, trans-
parency and benefit-sharing in Smart Farming. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2018.11.002.


Janc, K., Czapiewski, K., Wójcik, M., 2019. In the starting blocks for smart agriculture: the
internet as a source of knowledge in transitional agriculture. Njas - Wageningen J.
Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100309. 100309.


Jansen, K., Vellema, S., 2011. What is technography? Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. 57,
169–177.


Janssen, S.J.C., Porter, C.H., Moore, A.D., Athanasiadis, I.N., Foster, I., Jones, J.W., Antle,
J.M., 2017. Towards a new generation of agricultural system data, models and
knowledge products: information and communication technology. Agric. Syst. 155,
200–212.


Jensen, H., Jacobsen, L.-B., Pedersen, S., Tavella, E., 2012. Socioeconomic impact of
widespread adoption of precision farming and controlled traffic systems in Denmark.
Precis. Agric. 13, 661–677.


Jespersen, L.M., Hansen, J.P., Brunori, G., Jensen, A.L., Holst, K., Mathiesen, C., Nalberg,
N., Rasmussen, I.A., 2014. ICT and social media as drivers of multi-actor innovation
in agriculture - barriers, recommendations and potentials. Chapter 6 in Agricultural
Knowledge and Innovation Systems Towards 2020 : - an Orientation Article on
Linking Innovation and Research. EU, Brussels.


Jirotka, M., Grimpe, B., Stahl, B., Eden, G., Hartswood, M., 2017. Responsible research
and innovation in the digital age. Commun. ACM 60, 62–68.


Jouanjean, M.-A., 2019. Digital Opportunities for Trade in the Agriculture and Food
Sectors. OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 122. OECD Publishing,
Paris.


Kamilaris, A., Kartakoullis, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2017. A review on the practice of
big data analysis in agriculture. Comput. Electron. Agric. 143, 23–37.


Kaushik, P., Chowdhuy, A., Hambly Odame, H., van Passen, A., 2018. Social media for
enhancing stakeholders’ innovation networks in Ontario, Canada. J. Agric. Food Inf.
1–23.


Kelly, N., Bennett, J.M., Starasts, A., 2017. Networked learning for agricultural extension:
a framework for analysis and two cases. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 23, 399–414.


Keogh, M., Henry, M., 2016. The Implications of Digital Agriculture and Big Data for
Australian Agriculture. Australian Farm Institute, Sydney, Australia.


Kernecker, M., Knierim, A., Wurbs, A., Kraus, T., Borges, F., 2019. Experience versus
expectation: farmers’ perceptions of smart farming technologies for cropping systems
across Europe. Precis. Agric. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-019-09651-z. in press.


Klerkx, L., Proctor, A., 2013. Beyond fragmentation and disconnect: networks for
knowledge exchange in the English land management advisory system. Land Use
Policy 30, 13–24.


Knierim, A., Kernecker, M., Erdle, K., Kraus, T., Borges, F., Wurbs, A., et al., 2019. Smart
farming technology innovations – insights and reflections from the German Smart-
AKIS hub. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.


Koch, T., Windsperger, J., 2017. Seeing through the network: competitive advantage in


the digital economy. J. Organ. Des. 6, 6.
Köhler, J., Geels, F.W., Kern, F., Markard, J., Onsongo, E., Wieczorek, A., Alkemade, F.,


Avelino, F., Bergek, A., Boons, F., Fünfschilling, L., Hess, D., Holtz, G., Hyysalo, S.,
Jenkins, K., Kivimaa, P., Martiskainen, M., McMeekin, A., Mühlemeier, M.S., Nykvist,
B., Pel, B., Raven, R., Rohracher, H., Sandén, B., Schot, J., Sovacool, B., Turnheim, B.,
Welch, D., Wells, P., 2019. An agenda for sustainability transitions research: state of
the art and future directions. Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 31, 1–32.


Kozinets, R.V., 2010. Netnography: doing ethnographic research online. Int. J. Advert. 29,
328–330.


Kutter, T., Tiemann, S., Siebert, R., Fountas, S., 2011. The role of communication and co-
operation in the adoption of precision farming. Precis. Agric. 12, 2–17.


Labarthe, P., 2009. Extension services and multifunctional agriculture. Lessons learnt
from the French and Dutch contexts and approaches. J. Environ. Manage. 90,
S193–S202.


Leeuwis, C., 1993. Of Computers, Myths and Modelling : the Social Construction of
Diversity, Knowledge, Information, and Communication Technologies in Dutch
Horticulture and Agricultural Extension. PhD dissertation, Wageningen University,
The Netherlands.


Leeuwis, C., 1999. Integral Design: Innovation in Agriculture and Resource Management.
Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.


Leeuwis, C., Cieslik, K.J., Aarts, M.N.C., Dewulf, A.R.P.J., Ludwig, F., Werners, S.E.,
Struik, P.C., 2018. Reflections on the potential of virtual citizen science platforms to
address collective action challenges: lessons and implications for future research.
Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. 86–87, 146–157.


Lele, U., Goswami, S., 2017. The fourth industrial revolution, agricultural and rural in-
novation, and implications for public policy and investments: a case of India. Agric.
Econ. 48, 87–100.


Leonard, E., Rainbow, R., Trindall, J., Baker, I., Barry, S., Darragh, S., Darnell, R., George,
A., Heath, R., Jakku, E., Laurie, A., Lamb, D., Llewellyn, R., Perrett, E., Sanderson, J.,
Skinner, A., Stollery, T., Wiseman, W., Wood, G., Zhang, A., 2017. Accelerating
Precision Agriculture to Decision Agriculture: Enabling Digital Agriculture in
Australia. Cotton Research and Development Corporation.


Leveau, L., Bénel, A., Cahier, J.P., Pinet, F., Salembier, P., Soulignac, V., Bergez, J.E.,
2019. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and the Agroecological
Transition, Agroecological Transitions: From Theory to Practice in Local
Participatory Design. pp. 263–287.


Leviäkangas, P., 2016. Digitalisation of Finland’s transport sector. Technol. Soc. 47, 1–15.
Lindblom, J., Lundström, C., Ljung, M., Jonsson, A., 2017. Promoting sustainable in-


tensification in precision agriculture: review of decision support systems develop-
ment and strategies. Precis. Agric. 18, 309–331.


Lioutas, E.D., Charatsari, C., La Rocca, G., De Rosa, M., 2019. Key questions on the use of
big data in farming: an activity theory approach. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.003.


Lio, M., Liu, M.-C., 2006. ICT and agricultural productivity: evidence from cross-country
data. Agric. Econ. 34, 221–228. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-0864.2006.00120.x.


Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., Erickson, B., 2019. Setting the record straight on precision agri-
culture adoption. Agron. J. 111, 1552. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2018.12.
0779.


Liu, J., Hull, V., Batistella, M., DeFries, R., Dietz, T., Fu, F., Hertel, T.W., Izaurralde, R.C.,
Lambin, E.F., Li, S., Martinelli, L.A., McConnell, W.J., Moran, E.F., Naylor, R.,
Ouyang, Z., Polenske, K.R., Reenberg, A., de Miranda Rocha, G., Simmons, C.S.,
Verburg, P.H., Vitousek, P.M., Zhang, F., Zhu, C., 2013. Framing sustainability in a
telecoupled world. Ecol. Soc. 18 (2), 26.


Lundström, C., Lindblom, J., 2018. Considering farmers’ situated knowledge of using
agricultural decision support systems (AgriDSS) to Foster farming practices: the case
of CropSAT. Agric. Syst. 159, 9–20.


Lupton, D., 2014. Digital Sociology. Taylor and Francis, London.
Lusch, R.F., Vargo, S.L., O’Brien, M., 2007. Competing through service: insights from


service-dominant logic. J. Retail. 83, 5–18.
Mann, L., 2018. Left to other peoples’ devices? A political economy perspective on the big


data revolution in development. Dev. Change 49, 3–36.
Marin, A., Navas-Alemán, L., Perez, C., 2015. Natural resource industries as a platform for


the development of knowledge intensive industries. Tijdschr. Voor Econ. En Soc.
Geogr. 106, 154–168.


McCown, R.L., 2002. Changing systems for supporting farmers’ decisions: problems,
paradigms, and prospects. Agric. Syst. 74, 179–220.


McMichael, P., 2005. Global Development and The Corporate Food Regime, Research in
Rural Sociology and Development. pp. 265–299.


McPhearson, T., Haase, D., Kabisch, N., Gren, Å., 2016. Advancing understanding of the
complex nature of urban systems. Ecol. Indic. 70, 566–573.


Mills, J., Gaskell, P., Ingram, J., Dwyer, J., Reed, M., Short, C., 2017. Engaging farmers in
environmental management through a better understanding of behaviour. Agric.
Human Values 34, 283–299.


Miles, C., 2019. The combine will tell the truth: On precision agriculture and algorithmic
rationality. Big Data Soc. 6. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951719849444.


Mills, K.A., 2018. What are the threats and potentials of big data for qualitative research?
Qual. Res. 18, 591–603.


Miles, C., Smith, N., 2015. What grows in silicon valley? The emerging ideology of food
technology. In: Louise Davis, H., Pilgrim, Karyn, Sinha, Madhudaya (Eds.), Chapter 8
In The Ecopolitics of Consumption: The Food Trade. Lexington Books,
Washington D.C.


Mogili, U.R., Deepak, B.B.V.L., 2018. Review on application of drone systems in precision
agriculture. Procedia Comput. Sci. 502–509.


Munthali, N., Leeuwis, C., van Paassen, A., Lie, R., Asare, R., van Lammeren, R., Schut,
M., 2018. Innovation intermediation in a digital age: comparing public and private
new-ICT platforms for agricultural extension in Ghana. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.


L. Klerkx, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0400

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-019-00380-9

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-019-00380-9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0415

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.006

https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666910385556

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2018.11.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2018.11.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100309

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0485

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-019-09651-z

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0565

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.003

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-0864.2006.00120.x

https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2018.12.0779

https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2018.12.0779

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0630

https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951719849444

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0655




86–87, 64–76.
Nambisan, S., Wright, M., Feldman, M., 2019. The digital transformation of innovation


and entrepreneurship: progress, challenges and key themes. Res. Policy 48, 103773.
O’Donoghue, C., McKinstry, A., Green, S., Fealy, R., Heanue, K., Ryan, M., Connolly, K.,


Desplat, J.C., Horan, B., Crosson, P., 2016. A blueprint for a big data analytical so-
lution to low farmer engagement with financial management. Int. Food Agribusiness
Manage. Rev. 19 (A), 131–154.


Oosterveer, P., 2015. Promoting sustainable palm oil: viewed from a global networks and
flows perspective. J. Clean. Prod. 107, 146–153.


Oreszczyn, S., Lane, A., Carr, S., 2010. The role of networks of practice and webs of
influencers on farmers’ engagement with and learning about agricultural innovations.
J. Rural Stud. 26, 404–417.


Owen, R., Macnaghten, P., Stilgoe, J., 2012. Responsible research and innovation: from
science in society to science for society, with society. Sci. Public Policy 39, 751–760.


Patrício, D.I., Rieder, R., 2018. Computer vision and artificial intelligence in precision
agriculture for grain crops: a systematic review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 69–81.


Phillips, P.W.B., Relf-Eckstein, J.-A., Jobe, G., Wixted, B., 2019. Configuring the new
digital landscape in western Canadian agriculture. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.001.


Pigford, A.-A.E., Hickey, G.M., Klerkx, L., 2018. Beyond agricultural innovation systems?
Exploring an agricultural innovation ecosystems approach for niche design and de-
velopment in sustainability transitions. Agric. Syst. 164, 116–121.


Plumecocq, G., Debril, T., Duru, M., Magrini, M.-B., Sarthou, J.P., Therond, O., 2018. The
plurality of values in sustainable agriculture models: diverse lock-in and coevolution
patterns. Ecol. Soc. 23 (1), 21.


Prager, K., Labarthe, P., Caggiano, M., Lorenzo-Arribas, A., 2016. How does commer-
cialisation impact on the provision of farm advisory services? Evidence from Belgium,
Italy, Ireland and the UK. Land Use Policy 52, 329–344.


Poppe, K.J., Wolfert, S., Verdouw, C., Verwaart, T., 2013. Information and communica-
tion technology as a driver for change in agri-food chains. EuroChoices 12, 60–65.


Portanguen, S., Tournayre, P., Sicard, J., Astruc, T., Mirade, P.S., 2019. Toward the design
of functional foods and biobased products by 3D printing: a review. Trends Food Sci.
Technol. 86, 188–198.


Protopop, I., Shanoyan, A., 2016. Big data and smallholder farmers: big data applications
in the agri-food supply chain in developing countries. Int. Food Agribusiness Manage.
Rev. 19 (A), 173–190.


Regan, Á., 2019. ‘Smart farming’ in Ireland: a risk perception study with key governance
actors. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.02.003.


Relf-Eckstein, J.-A., Ballantyne, A.T., Phillips, P.W.B., 2019. Farming Reimagined: a case
study of autonomous farm equipment and creating an innovation opportunity space
for broadacre smart farming. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.


Rijswijk, K., Klerkx, L., Turner, J.A., 2019. Digitalisation in the New Zealand Agricultural
Knowledge and Innovation System: initial understandings and emerging organisa-
tional responses to digital agriculture. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci.


Roberts, E., Beel, D., Philip, L., Townsend, L., 2017. Rural resilience in a digital society:
editorial. J. Rural Stud. 54, 355–359.


Rogers, E.M., 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, New York.
Rojo Gimeno, C., Van der Voort, M., Niemi, J., Lauwers, L., Ringgaard Kristensen, A.,


Wauters, E., 2019. Assessment of the value of information of precision livestock
farming: A conceptual framework. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences.


Rose, D.C., Chilvers, J., 2018. Agriculture 4.0: Broadening Responsible Innovation in an
Era of Smart Farming. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, pp. 87.


Rose, D.C., Parker, C., Fodey, J., Park, C., Sutherland, W.J., Dicks, L.V., 2018. Involving
stakeholders in agricultural decision support systems: improving user-centred design.
Int. J. Agric. Manag. 6, 80–89.


Rose, D.C., Sutherland, W.J., Parker, C., Lobley, M., Winter, M., Morris, C., Twining, S.,
Ffoulkes, C., Amano, T., Dicks, L.V., 2016. Decision support tools for agriculture:
towards effective design and delivery. Agric. Syst. 149, 165–174.


Roth, S., Dahms, H.F., Welz, F., Cattacin, S., 2019. Print theories of computer societies.
Introduction to the digital transformation of social theory. Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change 149, 119778.


Rotz, S., Duncan, E., Small, M., Botschner, J., Dara, R., Mosby, I., Reed, M., Fraser, E.D.G.,
2019a. The politics of digital agricultural technologies: a preliminary review. Sociol.
Ruralis 59, 203–229.


Rotz, S., Gravely, E., Mosby, I., Duncan, E., Finnis, E., Horgan, M., LeBlanc, J., Martin, R.,
Neufeld, H.T., Nixon, A., Pant, L., Shalla, V., Fraser, E., 2019b. Automated pastures
and the digital divide: how agricultural technologies are shaping labour and rural
communities. J. Rural Stud. 68, 112–122.


Rutten, C.J., Steeneveld, W., Oude Lansink, A.G.J.M., Hogeveen, H., 2018. Delaying in-
vestments in sensor technology: the rationality of dairy farmers’ investment decisions
illustrated within the framework of real options theory. J. Dairy Sci. 101, 7650–7660.


Rutten, C.J., Velthuis, A.G.J., Steeneveld, W., Hogeveen, H., 2013. Invited review: sensors
to support health management on dairy farms. J. Dairy Sci. 96, 1928–1952.


Salemink, K., Strijker, D., Bosworth, G., 2017. Rural development in the digital age: a
systematic literature review on unequal ICT availability, adoption, and use in rural
areas. J. Rural Stud. 54, 360–371.


Sanderson, J., Wiseman, L., Poncini, S., 2018. What’s behind the ag-data logo? An ex-
amination of voluntary agricultural-data codes of practice. Int. J. Rural Law Policy 1,
1–21.


Schewe, R., Stuart, D., 2015. Diversity in agricultural technology adoption: How are
automatic milking systems used and to what end? Agric. Human Values 32 (2),
199–213.


Schimmelpfennig, D., Ebel, R., 2016. Sequential adoption and cost savings from precision
agriculture. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 41, 97–115. https://doi.
org/10.22004/ag.econ.230776.


Scholz, R., Bartelsman, E., Diefenbach, S., Franke, L., Grunwald, A., Helbing, D., Hill, R.,


Hilty, L., Höjer, M., Klauser, S., Montag, C., Parycek, P., Prote, J., Renn, O., Reichel,
A., Schuh, G., Steiner, G., Viale Pereira, G., 2018. Unintended side effects of the
digital transition: european scientists’ messages from a proposition-based expert
round table. Sustainability 10 (6), 2001.


Schuster, J., 2017. Big data ethics and the digital age of agriculture. Resource:
Engineering and Technology for Sustainable World 24, 20–21.


Sclar, E., 2015. The political economics of investment Utopia: public–private partnerships
for urban infrastructure finance. J. Econ. Policy Reform 18, 1–15.


Shamshiri, R.R., Weltzien, C., Hameed, I.A., Yule, I.J., Grift, T.E., Balasundram, S.K.,
Pitonakova, L., Ahmad, D., Chowdhary, G., 2018. Research and development in
agricultural robotics: a perspective of digital farming. Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 11,
1–14.


Shepherd, M., Turner, J.A., Small, B., Wheeler, D., 2018. Priorities for science to over-
come hurdles thwarting the full promise of the ‘digital agriculture’ revolution. J. Sci.
Food Agric. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9346.


Skvortsov, E.A., Skvortsova, E.G., Sandu, I.S., Iovlev, G.A., 2018. Transition of agriculture
to digital, intellectual and robotics technologies. Econ. Reg. 14, 1014–1028.


Smith, M.J., 2018. Getting value from artificial intelligence in agriculture. Anim. Prod.
Sci. https://doi.org/10.1071/AN18522. (in press).


Soma, K., Bogaardt, M.J., Poppe, K., Wolfert, S., Beers, G., Urdu, D., Pesce, Kirova, M.,
Thurston, C., Monfort Belles, C., 2019. Research for AGRI Committee - Impacts of the
Digital Economy on the Food Chain and the CAP. Policy Department for Structural
and Cohesion Policies, European Parliament. Brussels.


Stevens, T.M., Aarts, N., Termeer, C.J.A.M., Dewulf, A., 2016. Social media as a new
playing field for the governance of agro-food sustainability. Curr. Opin. Environ.
Sustain. 18, 99–106.


Sulaiman V, R., Hall, A., Kalaivani, N.J., Dorai, K., Reddy, T.S.V., 2012. Necessary, but
not sufficient: critiquing the role of information and communication technology in
putting knowledge into use. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 18, 331–346.


Sykuta, M., 2016. Big data in agriculture: property rights, privacy and competition in Ag
data services. Int. Food Agribusiness Manage. Rev. 19 (A), 57–74.


Taebi, B., Correljé, A., Cuppen, E., Dignum, M., Pesch, U., 2014. Responsible innovation
as an endorsement of public values: the need for interdisciplinary research. J.
Responsible Innov. 1 (1), 118–124. https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2014.
882072.


Teece, D.J., 2018. Profiting from innovation in the digital economy: enabling technolo-
gies, standards, and licensing models in the wireless world. Res. Policy 47,
1367–1387.


Teece, D.J., Linden, G., 2017. Business models, value capture, and the digital enterprise.
J. Organ. Des. 6, 8.


Tey, Y., Brindal, M., 2012. Factors influencing the adoption of precision agricultural
technologies: a review for policy implications. Precis. Agric. 13, 713–730.


Tsouvalis, J., Seymour, S., Watkins, C., 2000. Exploring knowledge-cultures: precision
farming, yield mapping, and the expert–farmer interface. Environ. Plan. A 32,
909–924. https://doi.org/10.1068/a32138.


Tilson, D., Lyytinen, K., Sørensen, C., 2010. Research commentary—digital infra-
structures: the missing IS research agenda. Inf. Syst. Res. 21, 748–759.


Tisenkopfs, T., Kunda, I., šūmane, S., Brunori, G., Klerkx, L., Moschitz, H., 2015. Learning
and innovation in agriculture and rural development: the use of the concepts of
boundary work and boundary objects. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 21, 13–33.


Trendov, N.M., Varas, S., Zenf, M., 2019. Digital Technologies in Agriculture and Rural
Areas: Status Report. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations,
Rome.


Turner, J.A., Klerkx, L., Rijswijk, K., Williams, T., Barnard, T., 2016. Systemic problems
affecting co-innovation in the New Zealand Agricultural Innovation System: identi-
fication of blocking mechanisms and underlying institutional logics. Njas -
Wageningen J. Life Sci. 76, 99–112.


Van der Burg, S., Bogaardt, M.-J., Wolfert, S., 2019. Ethics of smart farming: current
questions and directions for responsible innovation towards the future. Njas -
Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.01.001.


Van der Jagt, A.P.N., Raven, R., Dorst, H., Runhaar, H., 2019. Nature-based innovation
systems. Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.09.005. In
press.


Van Der Vorst, J.G.A.J., Ossevoort, R., De Keizer, M., Van Woensel, T., Verdouw, C.N.,
Wenink, E., Koppes, R., Van Willegen, R., 2015. DAVINC3I: Towards Collaborative
Responsive Logistics Networks in Floriculture, Logistics and Supply Chain
Innovation: Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Practice. pp. 37–53.


Van Hulst, F., Ellis, R., Prager, K., Msika, J., 2020. Using co-constructed mental models to
understand stakeholder perspectives on agroecology. Int. J. Agric. Sustainability.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2020.1743553.


Vasconez, J.P., Kantor, G.A., Auat Cheein, F.A., 2019. Human–robot interaction in agri-
culture: a survey and current challenges. Biosyst. Eng. 179, 35–48.


Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., 2013. Virtualisation of flor-
icultural supply chains: a review from an internet of things perspective. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 99, 160–175.


Verdouw, C., Wolfert, S., Tekinerdogan, B., 2016a. Internet of things in agriculture. CAB
reviews: perspectives in agriculture, veterinary science, nutrition and natural re-
sources. CABI 11, 35.


Verdouw, C.N., Wolfert, J., Beulens, A.J.M., Rialland, A., 2016b. Virtualization of food
supply chains with the internet of things. J. Food Eng. 176, 128–136.


Vik, J., Stræte, E.P., Hansen, B.G., Nærland, T., 2019. The political robot – the structural
consequences of automated milking systems (AMS) in Norway. Njas - Wageningen J.
Life Sci. 100305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100305.


Voon, S.L., An, J., Wong, G., Zhang, Y., Chua, C.K., 2019. 3D food printing: a categorised
review of inks and their development. Virtual Phys. Prototyp. 14, 203–218.


Wathes, C.M., Kristensen, H.H., Aerts, J.M., Berckmans, D., 2008. Is precision livestock


L. Klerkx, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0685

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0720

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.02.003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0805

https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.230776

https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.230776

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0830

https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9346

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0840

https://doi.org/10.1071/AN18522

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0865

https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2014.882072

https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2014.882072

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0885

https://doi.org/10.1068/a32138

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0910

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.01.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.09.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.09.005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0925

https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2020.1743553

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0950

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0965




farming an engineer’s daydream or nightmare, an animal’s friend or foe, and a
farmer’s panacea or pitfall? Comput. Electron. Agric. 64, 2–10.


Weersink, A., Fraser, E., Pannell, D., Duncan, E., Rotz, S., 2018. Opportunities and
challenges for big data in agricultural and environmental analysis. Annu. Rev.
Resour. Economics 10, 19–37.


West, J., 2018. A prediction model framework for cyber-attacks to precision agriculture
technologies. J. Agric. Food Inf. 19, 307–330.


Wettenhall, R., 2003. The rhetoric and reality of public-private partnerships. Public
Organ. Rev. 3, 77–107. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023000128175.


Wieczorek, A.J., Hekkert, M.P., 2012. Systemic instruments for systemic innovation
problems: a framework for policy makers and innovation scholars. Sci. Public Policy
39, 74–87.


Wiseman, L., Sanderson, J., Zhang, A., Jakku, E., 2019. Farmers and their data: an ex-
amination of farmers’ reluctance to share their data through the lens of the laws
impacting smart farming. Njas - Wageningen J. Life Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
njas.2019.04.007.


Wolf, S., Just, D., Zilberman, D., 2001. Between data and decisions: the organization of
agricultural economic information systems. Res. Policy 30, 121–141.


Wolf, S.A., Buttel, F.H., 1996. The political economy of precision farming. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 78, 1269–1274.


Wolf, S.A., Wood, S.D., 1997. Precision farming: environmental legitimation,


commodification of information, and industrial coordination. Rural Sociol. 62,
180–206.


Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., Bogaardt, M.-J., 2017. Big data in smart farming – a
review. Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80.


World Bank, 2017. ICT In Agriculture: Connecting Smallholders to Knowledge, Networks,
and Institutions. World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.


World Bank, 2019. Future of Food - Harnessing Digital Technologies to Improve Food
System Outcomes. World Bank, Washington D.C.


Wyche, S., Steinfield, C., 2016. Why Don’t Farmers Use Cell Phones to Access Market
Prices? Technology Affordances and Barriers to Market Information Services
Adoption in Rural Kenya. Inf. Technol. Dev. 22, 320–333. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02681102.2015.1048184.


Yeates, J.W., 2017. How good? Ethical criteria for a ‘Good Life’ for farm animals. J. Agric.
Environ. Ethics 30 (1), 23–35. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-017-9650-2.


Yoo, 2010. Computing in Everyday Life: A Call for Research on Experiential Computing.
MIS Quarterly. pp. 34.


Zhang, D., Wei, B., 2017. Robotics and Mechatronics for Agriculture. CRC Press, Boca
Raton.


Zhao, G., Liu, S., Lopez, C., Lu, H., Elgueta, S., Chen, H., Boshkoska, B.M., 2019.
Blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management: a synthesis of appli-
cations, challenges and future research directions. Comput. Ind. 109, 83–99.


L. Klerkx, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0975

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023000128175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0985

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.007

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.04.007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref0995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1020

https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2015.1048184

https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2015.1048184

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-017-9650-2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1573-5214(19)30176-9/sbref1045


