









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.comAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017) 000–000  


 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 


* Paulo Afonso. Tel.: +351 253 510 761; fax: +351 253 604 741  
E-mail address: psafonso@dps.uminho.pt 


2351-9789 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Manufacturing Engineering Society International Conference 2017.  


Manufacturing Engineering Society International Conference 2017, MESIC 2017, 28-30 June 
2017, Vigo (Pontevedra), Spain 


Costing models for capacity optimization in Industry 4.0: Trade-off 
between used capacity and operational efficiency 


A. Santanaa, P. Afonsoa,*, A. Zaninb, R. Wernkeb 
a University of Minho, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal 


bUnochapecó, 89809-000 Chapecó, SC, Brazil  


Abstract 


Under the concept of "Industry 4.0", production processes will be pushed to be increasingly interconnected, 
information based on a real time basis and, necessarily, much more efficient. In this context, capacity optimization 
goes beyond the traditional aim of capacity maximization, contributing also for organization’s profitability and value. 
Indeed, lean management and continuous improvement approaches suggest capacity optimization instead of 
maximization. The study of capacity optimization and costing models is an important research topic that deserves 
contributions from both the practical and theoretical perspectives. This paper presents and discusses a mathematical 
model for capacity management based on different costing models (ABC and TDABC). A generic model has been 
developed and it was used to analyze idle capacity and to design strategies towards the maximization of organization’s 
value. The trade-off capacity maximization vs operational efficiency is highlighted and it is shown that capacity 
optimization might hide operational inefficiency.  
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Manufacturing Engineering Society International Conference 
2017. 


Keywords: Cost Models; ABC; TDABC; Capacity Management; Idle Capacity; Operational Efficiency 


1. Introduction 


The cost of idle capacity is a fundamental information for companies and their management of extreme importance 
in modern production systems. In general, it is defined as unused capacity or production potential and can be measured 
in several ways: tons of production, available hours of manufacturing, etc. The management of the idle capacity 


Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207


2351-9789 © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services.
10.1016/j.promfg.2018.10.157


10.1016/j.promfg.2018.10.157 2351-9789


© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services. 





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  


www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 





2351-9789 © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services.  


7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services 


Through-life cyber resilience in future smart manufacturing 
environments. A research programme. 


Paul Theron, PhD 
Cranfield University, Professor, Atkins-Cranfield Chair of Cyber-secure engineering systems and processes, Head of the Manufacturing 


Informatics Centre; email: p.theron@cranfield.ac.uk 
 


Abstract 


Smart manufacturing has recently become the industry’s buzzword, with the promise of improved performance and greater agility. 
Also named Industry 4.0 (I4), this concept relies upon a system of systems made of myriads of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
components. Along with the expected enhancements come new cyber-threats as the attack surface and pathways will increase. This 
conference paper argues that I4’s cyber resilience demands an ad hoc research programme. Firstly, we briefly compare Operations 
Technology (OT) with classic Information Technology (IT) and IoT technology to highlight their differences and the latters’ impact 
on cyber resilience. Secondly, we depict the concept of operation of future I4 systems and point out the specific challenges they 
raise. Next, we review the concept of through-life cyber resilience assurance and complement the list of future I4 environments’ 
challenges. Fourthly, we present Cranfield University’s Manufacturing Informatics Centre’s (MIC) research & education strategy 
and show how it relates to the identified challenges. In our conclusion, we suggest ways to foster collaboration between the Industry, 
the Government and the MIC to address these challenges and to allow the United Kingdom to approach I4’s challenges with 
increased confidence. 
 
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services. 


Keywords: Type your keywords here, separated by semicolons ;  








Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  


www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 





2351-9789 © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services.  


7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services 


Through-life cyber resilience in future smart manufacturing 
environments. A research programme. 


Paul Theron, PhD 
Cranfield University, Professor, Atkins-Cranfield Chair of Cyber-secure engineering systems and processes, Head of the Manufacturing 


Informatics Centre; email: p.theron@cranfield.ac.uk 
 


Abstract 


Smart manufacturing has recently become the industry’s buzzword, with the promise of improved performance and greater agility. 
Also named Industry 4.0 (I4), this concept relies upon a system of systems made of myriads of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
components. Along with the expected enhancements come new cyber-threats as the attack surface and pathways will increase. This 
conference paper argues that I4’s cyber resilience demands an ad hoc research programme. Firstly, we briefly compare Operations 
Technology (OT) with classic Information Technology (IT) and IoT technology to highlight their differences and the latters’ impact 
on cyber resilience. Secondly, we depict the concept of operation of future I4 systems and point out the specific challenges they 
raise. Next, we review the concept of through-life cyber resilience assurance and complement the list of future I4 environments’ 
challenges. Fourthly, we present Cranfield University’s Manufacturing Informatics Centre’s (MIC) research & education strategy 
and show how it relates to the identified challenges. In our conclusion, we suggest ways to foster collaboration between the Industry, 
the Government and the MIC to address these challenges and to allow the United Kingdom to approach I4’s challenges with 
increased confidence. 
 
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 7th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services. 


Keywords: Type your keywords here, separated by semicolons ;  


 



http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.promfg.2018.10.157&domain=pdf




194 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
2 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


 
IT, OT, IoT: differences and impacts on cyber resilience 
 
Information technology (IT) provides our society with the means to process the data feeding management systems of 
all kinds, from online commerce to human resource handling, from production scheduling to quality control, from 
banking and insurance to local government administration, etc. In terms of security, their designers seek to assure 
the confidentiality of data, their integrity and their availability. The recent introduction of the European GDPR act 
has placed the focus on privacy.  
 
Operations Technology (OT) systems are those systems mixing hardware and software components that detect or 
cause changes in physical processes and devices in order to deliver intended functions in the physical world. Their 
designers seek to confer them constant availability and reliability. Those goals are reached if OT systems’ 
availability, integrity and confidentiality characteristics are engineered into systems and preserved along systems’ 
full lifecycle. 
 
Examples of OT systems include: 


– Industrial production; 
– Home and building automation; 
– Ground transportation networks; 
– Power generation; 
– Security and surveillance systems; 
– Weapon systems systems… 


 
Their failure or a severe disturbance of their processes may result in dramatic consequences, ranging from halting 
industrial installations to the abortion of defence missions or creating collateral damage in combat situations. 
 
Therefore, OT systems are designed to satisfy very high-performance requirements, including: 


– Reliability 
– Safety of people, the environment and installations 
– Data & systems’ classification in military contexts 
– Rapidity of execution and quality of results 
– Availability, and continuity in tough running conditions 
– Autonomy in case of disconnection from energy sources or communication networks 
– Robustness, long life span and low-cost maintenance. 


 
Current industrial systems are usually made of: 


– Robots, sensors and actuators, i.e. cyber-physical elements that deliver and help controlling production or 
transportation or building automation processes; 


– Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) that pilot those operational components; 
– Remote Terminal Units (RTU) that pilot sets of PLCs; 
– Engineering terminals that allow to diagnose and (re)configure RTUs and PLCs (note that PLCs themselves 


often have an embedded minimal man machine interface for the same purpose); 
– A Supervisory Control & Data Acquisition (SCADA) system that supervises the entire (or a part of an) 


industrial network; 
– Networks and communication protocols, like Modbus and many others [1], to connect the previous elements 


together. 
 


 
Between different domains of application, there are differences in protocols and technologies. 
 






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 195 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  3 


In this context, we define cybersecurity as systems’ ability to be immune (robust) to cyber-threats, and cyber 
defence as systems’ ability to resist successfully cyber-incidents (attacks) and to improve out of lessons learnt [2].  
Cyber resilience is understood as the “sum” of cybersecurity and cyber defence.  
It aims at preserving the continuity, reliability and safety of our social, industrial, security and military activities in 
the face of ever increasing and evolving cyber threats. 
 
If, currently, security requirements are deemed to differ between IT and OT systems (see for instance [3]), demands 
for processing speed, availability and reliability do not really diverge between the two types of systems. So that it is 
not so important to argue about which security goals are a priority in one or the other domain. But OT specialists’ 
engineering culture is specific [3] as they have an “inherently change- and risk-averse culture on the shop floor”. 
And for the purpose of this paper this is very important as it constrains the way cybersecurity can be (retro)fitted and 
maintained in OT technologies and systems. It can only be slow as multiple tests and precautions are then requested. 
 
IoT is a particular species of OT technology. It allows creating “systems that interact with the physical world using 
networked entities (e.g., sensors, actuators, information resources, people)” [3]. It is made of many-to-many 
interacting components some of which have sensors and actuators to interact with the physical world and an IoT 
component “has some combination of the following capabilities: actuating, data storing, human user interface (UI), 
networking, network interface, processing, sensing, and supporting” [3]. Those basic building blocks of IoT systems 
can themselves be sets of IoT components or even entire IT systems. Due to their cheap price, the varied ways they 
may be procured and their sometimes fuzzy origin, their sometimes basic technologies and computing and memory 
capacities, their variable energy requirements, or else latency issues, different integration middleware, variable 
orchestration choices, at times inexistent or succinct documentation, intellectual property rights, variable update 
policies, or IoT system builders’ level of control over all these factors, IoT components are usually better seen today 
as simply black box constituents selected only for the delivery of a desired function and performance, based on a set 
of specified interfaces. 
 
A variety of open source and proprietary IoT development platforms is available on the market, with their respective 
advantages and limitations [4]. 
 
In terms of system architecture, many configuration scenarios are possible for IoT-based digital supply chains, 
including point-to-point, star and mesh topologies [5]. Event-driven, resource-driven, auction-based (Liang & Hsu, 
2014) and need-driven distributed operations, as well as unpredictable alterations and reconfigurations can shape 
and alter the IoT’s set of components and their operating relations. In any-to-any infrastructures (CISCO, 2014), 
clusters of cooperating components vary in time and space (Mahmud, et al., 2018), at the speed of needs, of 
changes, of incidents and dynamic reconfigurations. Software defined networks will also cause IoT-based digital 
supply chains to vary in shape and set of active components through through continuously evolving logical 
topologies (Vicino, et al., 2014), the decoupling of function and location (Lopez, et al., 2016) and dynamic, 
automated SDN programs (Bista, et al., 2013). As those digital supply-chains will grow in complexity, solutions like 
autonomic computing (Ganek & Corbi, 2003) may be adopted with the consequence of also making IIoT networks’ 
configuration highly changeable. 
 
These factors make the cybersecurity of future smart manufacturing and other IoT systems far more uncertain than 
todays well-connected, centrally administered networks. 
 
Besides, cybersecurity may be breached by unknown vulnerabilities in uncontrolled – unsafe – IoT components, 
while the latter may connect to open, equally uncontrolled public networks via the Internet, both exposing others to 
cyber-threats and making them a potential source of cyber-threats (NIST, 2018). 
 
Unless designers or business decision makers manage to impose the generalization of cybersecurity certification, the 
choice of stable and well-controlled architectures and telcos’ or cloud providers’ commitment to a high level of 
connection quality of service and security for the entire Industry 4.0, securing and monitoring IIoT systems, 
responding to cyber-attacks and restoring their cybersecurity in the short times required by industrial production 
continuity imperatives – this is the ultimate business challenge – may reveal hard, if not impossible. 






196 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
4 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


 
The concept of operation of future Industry 4.0 systems 
Future smart manufacturing Industry 4.0 systems will be based on the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Its 
architecture will be built along the following components and layers such as described in (NIST, 2018): 


1. The device layer includes all the elements that compose manufacturing processes; 
2. The communication layer allows the coordination and cooperation of manufacturing processes; 
3. The cloud layer stands as the application-enabler layer and permits data consolidation and sharing, 


including Machine to Machine (M2M, and we could also use the acronym for Manufacture to 
Manufacture), the availability of APIs for connecting the manufacturing cloud with other applications (for 
instance, web-based commercial applications, supply chain and logistics management, and E2E – 
Enterprise to Enterprise – applications), and management applications; 


4. The big data layer leverages the huge masses of data gathered in the manufacturing cloud to prepare and 
analyse data for later use at the next level of the architecture; 


5. The supervision layer calls upon intelligent software technologies (visualisation, IA and especially machine 
learning) to monitor and optimize manufacturing processes in the lower layers. 


 
The following diagram represents these five layers: 
 






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 197
4 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


 
The concept of operation of future Industry 4.0 systems 
Future smart manufacturing Industry 4.0 systems will be based on the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Its 
architecture will be built along the following components and layers such as described in (NIST, 2018): 


1. The device layer includes all the elements that compose manufacturing processes; 
2. The communication layer allows the coordination and cooperation of manufacturing processes; 
3. The cloud layer stands as the application-enabler layer and permits data consolidation and sharing, 


including Machine to Machine (M2M, and we could also use the acronym for Manufacture to 
Manufacture), the availability of APIs for connecting the manufacturing cloud with other applications (for 
instance, web-based commercial applications, supply chain and logistics management, and E2E – 
Enterprise to Enterprise – applications), and management applications; 


4. The big data layer leverages the huge masses of data gathered in the manufacturing cloud to prepare and 
analyse data for later use at the next level of the architecture; 


5. The supervision layer calls upon intelligent software technologies (visualisation, IA and especially machine 
learning) to monitor and optimize manufacturing processes in the lower layers. 


 
The following diagram represents these five layers: 
 


 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  5 


–  
Fig 1. Industry 4.0’s generic architecture.  
 
One of the fundamental concepts of operation and motivations of Industry 4.0 smart manufacturing is agility.  
To illustrate what this means, Bosch explains (Ferber, 2012) that in the future Industry 4.0 make-to-order 
manufacturing, specifications will be embedded within each piece of work and the latter will itself give instructions 
and command to production robots within multi-product manufacturing lines. 
 






198 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
6 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


Through increased connectedness, flexible supply chains and decentralized competing and responsive production 
capacities, customers will gain customized and innovative products at optimal prices and lead times from the most 
customer-oriented and best-cooperating manufacturers (Bechtold, et al., 2014), whatever their actual size. For this 
reason too, the underlying IT+OT manufacturing process will vary widely. A single business request may then 
materialize into numerous digital supply chains that will not anymore be placed under the control of major 
companies. Creative start-ups and niche players will enter these ad hoc cooperative supply chains (Bechtold, et al., 
2014).  
 
Such variety (and uncertainty as to who will take part in digital supply chains), even if communication and 
Production Performance Management standards emerge for the common good, will create differences in architecture 
and cybersecurity maturity. This will call for consistent improvements of market players’ good practices for the 
development of their digital infrastructure and systems (Gates & Bremicker, 2017) as well as cybersecurity 
dispositions (NIST, 2018), (Sniderman, et al., 2016).  
 
The fact that each piece of work contains its specific manufacturing and logistic data and instructions will also be a 
new vector for cyber-attacks. 
 
As in all multi-stakeholder domains relying on shared infrastructures (like aviation, telecommunications, etc.), the 
need for norms and a collective governance of cyber resilience will grow in years to come (Gates & Bremicker, 
2017). 
 
The concept of through-life cyber resilience assurance 
As said earlier, cyber resilience is the “sum” of cybersecurity and cyber defence. Building cyber resilience rather 
than simply cybersecurity into future smart manufacturing systems is a necessity caused by the now well-shared 
finding that the adversarial nature of cyber-attacks can defeat cybersecurity dispositions and take advantage in any 
relapse in measures aimed at preventing cyber-attacks. 
 
Through-life cyber resilience is the activity that creates and maintains cyber resilience across all phases of a 
system’s lifecycle, from the moment its concept is formulated, to the moment it is released for operation, and until it 
is decommissioned. 
 
In through-life cyber resilience, three dimensions are at play: 


– Cyber resilience governance; 
– Systems’ development processes; 
– Cyber resilience mechanisms. 


 
Cyber resilience governance 
 
In domains, like smart manufacturing, the telecommunications, aviation or future global mobility, each one 
supported by vital infrastructures, there is a need for a collective governance of cyber resilience across the entire 
value chain and countless stakeholders.  
 
For instance, the former European Public Private Partnership for Resilience (EP3R)* and now its replacement, the 
Network and Information Security (NIS) platform†, have been European Commission’s attempts to organize some 
form of collaborative governance of cybersecurity in the telecommunications sector.  
 
In the aviation sector, the European Agency for Safety in Aviation (EASA), under the STORM workstream (Shared 





 
* https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/ep3r-2009-2013  
† https://resilience.enisa.europa.eu/nis-platform  






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 199
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  7 


Trans-Organisational Risk Management), is currently trying to establish a similar mechanism to bring operators to 
the same table in order to reflect on transverse cyber-risks and to set-up collective mechanism to handle them.  
Similarly, various national aviation authorities and stakeholders aim at organising the collective governance of cyber 
risks across their national aviation chain.  
 
In such a context, the collective governance of cyber resilience implies a multilevel, multi-stakeholder, cross-
domain and even cross-border process (Lie, et al., 2009), (UN-DESA, 2011), (European Commission, 2017), just 
like the governance of telecommunication infrastructures’ resilience (European Commission - DG JLS, 2011). A 
global governance framework is described, for instance, in (Theron, 2016). It summarises the findings from various 
studies and organises governance into a set of interdependent processes: 


– A domain / cross-domain / international / national multi-stakeholder process that usually establishes sectorial 
regulations or legislation and the means to enforce them; 


– A four-level corporate process that includes: top management steering, stakeholders engagement through 
continuous improvement loops, cyber resilience building, and cyber resilience preservation in operation. 


In the automotive sector, the future ISO-SAE 21434 standard on Road vehicles cybersecurity engineering is likely to 
take these levels into account and to express ad hoc requirements for car manufacturers and their suppliers. 
However, challenges are manifold (Trimintzios, et al., 2017): sovereignty issues, differences and inconsistencies 
between legislative frameworks, lack of data, fierce competition (European Commission - DG JLS, 2011), 
difficulties in information sharing, differences in maturity, insufficient levels of investment and spending, ever-
changing threats, technological developments, etc. 
 
Systems’ development processes 
 
Building secure systems and maintaining the latter’s cyber resilience once in operation and until decommissioning 
requires that the process by which they are conceived, designed, developed, tested and approved for service 
prescribes the activities that permit to create: 


– Cybersecurity measures that must be embedded into systems, their production chain, the tools to be used for 
servicing them and into any other processes that will operate systems (like owner changes, repair, 
decommissioning, etc.), in order to protect the latter from cyber-threats during their entire lifecycle; 


– Cyber defence dispositions that must be embedded both into systems and in stakeholders’ organisations to 
allow handling attacks targeting development and production platforms, systems of all kinds and marketed 
products, and support processes once systems are in operation until, and including, decommissioning; 


– Measures that will help stakeholders, including tier-n market players, to continuously monitor cyber threats 
and evaluate cyber risks and to preserve and maintain systems’ and products’ cybersecurity once in operation. 


 
For instance, again, the future ISO/SAE 21434 international standard on road vehicles cybersecurity engineering 
should make requirements in those directions. 
 
But doing so is a major industrial challenge as investments cannot be extended as far as the cyber threat might 
demand. Tough choices must be made by business owners, based on their financial capacities and risk appetite.  
In the automotive sector, cyber resilience investments should go in priority to components and systems that are 
deemed critical. Criticality should be defined a measure of the potential impact of a cyber-attack, on safety for 
instance. For example, a vehicle’s breaking system is safety-critical. A cyber-attack that would target it could affect 
the vehicle’s safety. Therefore, the breaking system is critical from a cybersecurity standpoint. Criticality levels are 
deemed stable across lifecycle stages and possibly across the automotive industry. It is then the designers’ job to 
elaborate the car’s architecture that will best assure cybersecurity. So that vehicles’ development processes will be 
augmented of the required cyber resilience engineering tasks and dispositions.  
This is nothing new. The Military progressively implement similar requirements in procurement programmes based 






200 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
8 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


on their usual architecture frameworks such as NAF for NATO‡, DODAF for the USA§, MODAF for the UK**, 
etc. Creating the Industrial Internet of Things will obey similar considerations. An IoT architecture framework is 
being casted at the present moment by the IEEE Standards Association††. 
 
Cyber resilience mechanisms 
 
Several comparable frameworks exist today to help engineering infrastructures’ cyber resilience:  


– (Bodeau & Graubart, 2011) MITRE’s Cyber Resiliency Engineering Framework, used as the basis of NIST’s 
2014 Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (NIST, 2014), 


– The survivability framework (Sterbenz, et al., September 2002), (Sterbenz, et al., 2010),  
– The P3R3 risk reduction model (Theron, 2013). 


The review of these frameworks shows, as synthesised in the P3R3 model, that risk reduction is achieved through 
six mechanisms (the MITRE/NIST framework has 5 functions: Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, Recover). The 
first three mechanisms correspond essentially to making an object robust (immune) to the cyber threat, the last three 
to making it resistant to cyber-attacks: 


1. Prevision is the mechanism that seeks to identify in advance the hostile agents and the gross portfolio of 
threats to which a target object, such as an infrastructure, might be – or is – exposed. Cyber threat 
intelligence is a typical activity. 


2. Prevention is the mechanism that reduces identified threats at their source, either by eliminating or 
distancing from hostile agents, or by deterring them from exercising their threats, for instance by making 
the exercise of threats over costly or over risky for hostile agents (Mikolic-Torreira, et al., 2016). 
Prevention leaves a portfolio of residual threats, i.e. a gross portfolio of risks. 


3. Protection is the mechanism that seeks to reduce the likelihood that residual threats convert into incidents, 
and to reduce the impacts of incidents should they happen. Protection consists typically in fitting 
cybersecurity into systems and, when required, evaluating and certifying it (as per ISO 15408 Common 
Criteria for example). However, as the protection of complex systems cannot be complete, protection 
activities leave residual risks and therefore must also establish and train resistance mechanisms (the next 
three below). 


4. Recognition is the mechanism that monitors an identified object, seeks to detect as early as possible the 
potential or actual occurrence of incidents affecting the object (despite the previous three “P” mechanisms), 
and raises alarms when incidents are confirmed.  


5. Response is the mechanism that mobilises incident response forces and seeks to absorb / tolerate, contain, 
mitigate and stop incidents, to resist the destructive pressures of incidents, to safeguard the people and 
assets at risk and to mitigate damages, to maintain missions running even if only in an acceptable degraded 
mode, to restore nominal performances as soon as feasible, and to keep all pieces of evidence, traces and 
documents that may be useful later in insurance, litigation, judiciary or (military) retaliation procedures.  


6. Rebound is the mechanism that seeks to give a damaged object (or set of objects if considering knock-on 
effects) a new course of life or status after an incident has been resolved by rebuilding lives and objects that 
most suffered, drawing and sharing the lessons of experience, analysing the adequacy of the object(s) to 
possibly new circumstances, and adapting the object(s) accordingly as and if appropriate. In that sense, the 
rebound mechanism processes residual damage. 


 
The examination of the frameworks previously cited also shows that a typical list of practical capabilities is needed 
within each of these six mechanisms: 
 





 
‡ http://nafdocs.org  
§ https://dodcio.defense.gov/Library/DoD-Architecture-Framework  
** https://www.gov.uk/guidance/mod-architecture-framework  
†† https://standards.ieee.org/develop/project/2413.html and http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/2413  






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 201
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  9 


P3R3 MECHANISMS GENERIC P3R3 CYBER RESILIENCE CAPABILITIES 


P1- Prevision 
(identifying threats) 


P1.1- Threat intelligence (public or private sources & means, …) 


P1.2- Threat analysis (identification, capacities, targets, vectors, risks) 


P1.3- Threat evaluation & prioritisation and Resilience policy & strategy 


P2- Prevention 
(of identified threats) 


P2.1- Public-Private cooperation & legislative support 


P2.2- Reduction of threats at source or deterrence 


P3- Protection 
(of systems against 
residual threats) 


P3.1- Incident / attack avoidance and absorption dispositions engineering  


P3.2- Incident / attack coping dispositions engineering 


P3.3- Awareness raising, education, testing & training (preparation) 


P3.4- Management of systems’ configuration, lifecycle and procurement 


R1- Recognition 
(of an incident) 


R1.1- Monitoring & analysis of events and detection of incidents 


R1.2- Confirmation of incidents 


R1.3- Alarm on incident 
R2- Response 
(to incidents in order to 
defend missions & 
systems) 


R2.1- Mobilisation process (response activation decision and activation) 


R2.2- Response 


R2.3- Evidence management & exploitation, forensics & inquiries 


R3- Rebound 
(to new course of life / 
operation & status) 


R3.1- Repair & reconstruction (Healing) 


R3.2- Lesson learning & sharing 


R3.3- Adaptation & improvement (Renewal) 


R3.4- Investigations, legal suits, insurance claims, retaliation 
Fig 2. P3R3 cyber resilience capabilities.  
 
Some of these capabilities are the fruit of governance choices, such as collaborating with national cybersecurity 
authorities or working to gain support from the legislator. Others must be implemented during the development of 
systems and products, such as the engineering of protective barriers. Some others stem from the culture built into 
organisations to address cybersecurity issues. 
 
This review of through-life cyber resilience shows that it is a multi-facetted effort, not left to engineers alone nor to 
users or managers only. It is a collective elaboration. 
 
Areas of research to invest in and Cranfield’s Manufacturing Informatics Centre’s directions 
 
If we summarise the various challenges identified along this paper, we find: 


– A governance challenge; 
– A cyber resilience engineering challenge; 
– A cultural challenge. 


 
The governance challenge 
 
This smart manufacturing challenge has several key aspects: 


– The solitude of business managers in the face of upcoming huge system complexity, a long-known issue of 
business managers’ information technology competencies (Bassellier, et al., 2001), and the challenge for them 






202 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
10 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


to make enlightened decisions about investments on emerging technologies; this may affect the pace of 
adoption of smart manufacturing or change the balance of power between market players along the value chain; 


– The challenge of multi-stakeholder collaboration in an individualistic, highly-competitive, heterogeneous 
(from the cybersecurity standpoint), large, multilevel-process, cross-border and cross-sector field at large; ill-
managed, this may jeopardise the capacity of the industry at large to master the cybersecurity and cyber defence 
of the value chain; 


– The {technology user - technology supplier - technology regulator} dialog in an offer-led market of both IIoT 
and cybersecurity, with legislation, standardisation and policy issues and challenges; this competition for 
power over markets will feed incomprehension and will further complicate technicians’ tasks to ultimately 
delay progress towards cybersecure digital supply chains; 


– Anticipating the implications of future technological breakthroughs and applications, with “more biology and 
less physics”, with bio-electronics and bio-machine intelligence (Marsh, 2016), a different understanding of 
“value”, friendly retail robots, scale logic changes (and downsizing / making local again product 
manufacturing), etc. (Evans, 2016); strictly from a cybersecurity standpoint, such breakthroughs will 
complicate system and security engineers’ work at both the development and operation stages of the lifecycle; 


 
The cyber resilience engineering challenge 
 
This smart manufacturing challenge has several key aspects: 


– The challenge of making sure that industrial challenges of speed, productivity, continuity, reliability and safety 
will keep being met in the Industry 4.0 context; to that end, OT/IACS engineers will ask for guarantees that 
inspection, verification, validation and qualification activities be performed in ways that meet the challenge, 
meaning far more resource and spending and a potentially huge rise in the cost of industrial systems and 
products; alternatively, security-minoring trade-offs will endanger the entire value chain and create issues of 
trust between clients and manufacturers; 


– The poor design of things, devices and systems, also a long-known issue (Fairbanks & Caplan, 2004), currently 
a mixture of technical complication for users and administrators and of a lack of widely shared HMI standards 
in a technical jungle of idiosyncratic product offerings, will keep both engineers and users struggling to install, 
interface, operate and maintain the IIoT; the same applies to cybersecurity; should this point be left unresolved, 
it might lead managers and engineers to make easy and quick, but potentially adverse, choices; this in turn 
would reinforce cyber vulnerabilities in devices, connections and operator terminals; this engineering 
challenge calls for a drastic simplification of systems and components’ interfaces and procedures; 


– The challenge of understanding how complex massively interconnected, shape-varying, ill-delimited systems 
will behave in a society itself massively connected but unaware of the dependencies and vulnerabilities that 
this creates for everyone; what is at stake here is the capacity of centralised security operations centres (SOC) 
to monitor IIoT systems, to detect cyber-attacks in real time, and to resolve the latter at the speed of events 
and systems, not at the pace of human operators; artificial intelligence deployed in such centralised contexts 
of operation will resolve nothing if IIoT systems are not built on today’s centralised hierarchical models; this 
engineering challenge requires to research now how to create an autonomous, intelligent and seamless cyber 
defence technology that will fight malware for us humans; the idea has already been explored (Blakely & 
Theron, 2018), (Kott, et al., 2018), (LeBlanc, et al., 2017), (Theron, et al., 2019),  but it raises ethical and 
technological concerns about the risks of technological entities’ autonomy; 


– The complexity of the co-engineering of systems and cybersecurity and of the visualisation of the impacts of 
architectural choices; today’s model-based system engineering platforms (like Polarsys’ Capella engineering 
suite‡‡, IBM’s Rational Rhapsody§§, UNICOM’s System Architect who acquired IBM’s Rational System 





 
‡‡ https://www.polarsys.org/  
§§ https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/downloads/r/rhapsodydeveloper/index.html  






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 203
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  11 


Architect*** or standards like ISO/IEC 13719-2:1998 on Portable Common Tool Environment (PCTE)†††, 
etc.) are being progressively interfaced with model-based cyber-risk analysis software in an attempt to add the 
cybersecurity engineering dimension to traditional system engineering; if this seems to head into the right 
direction, recent projects such as MODESEC ‡‡‡  or the Model-based Security Toolkit (SecKit) and 
methodology§§§ attempt to tackle the difficulty inherent to the exercise: a modification of the system’s 
architecture, for instance, impacts on its cybersecurity while a change in cybersecurity measures impacts on 
the system’s performance at large; besides systems of the size and complexity of future smart manufacturing 
will imply numbers of design classes of objects and their relations measured in millions, far beyond any 
human’s cognitive ability; this co-engineering challenge requires therefore research in two areas 


– The issue of cybersecurity certification in a low-cost huge-volume market of things; this engineering challenge 
is linked to the idea that only cybersecurity-certified objects should be integrated in future systems to provide 
a baseline level of cybersecurity; this is the sense, for instance, of European projects on IACS cybersecurity 
certification conducted under the govern of the Commission’s Joint Research Centre (Theron, 2016), (Theron 
& Lazari, 2018) and legislative moves (JOIN(2017) 450 final, 2017),  (COM(2017) 477 final, 2017) ; however, 
reality defies practicality: the number of objects to certify will be so huge, while the effort for the certification 
of a single item is itself so big that the challenge is practically impossible to address; where research can 
usefully contribute lowering the difficulty of mass-certification is through the automation of cybersecurity 
evaluation tests; 


– The challenge of preserving cybersecurity in the post-production phase of systems and products’ lifecycle until 
their decommissioning; this engineering challenge can be easily overcome by taking care at the concept and 
development stage of cybersecurity maintenance and preservation in the operation phase of systems and 
products’ lifecycle; research should focus on the how of this, and also on how to engage post-production 
stakeholders in a form of “good cyber behaviour” that would make them increasingly the actors of 
cybersecurity maintenance and of its preservation in the course of support activities and processes until 
decommissioning. 


 
The cultural challenge 
 
This smart manufacturing challenge has several key aspects: 


– The likely under-awareness of cyber-risks associated with the IIoT; 
– The lack of people with the appropriate knowledge and skills, evaluated for Europe only at around 350.000 


(JOIN(2017) 450 final, 2017); 
– Creating a societal culture of cybersecurity and cyber defence that does not entail global paranoid behaviours 


as citizens are more and more told their responsibility in preserving our society’s cybersecurity (U.S. 
Department of Energy, 2013), (Shaikh, 2015), (Ottawa Citizen, 2017). 


 
Cranfield Manufacturing Informatics Centre’s research directions 
Besides its existing activities, Cranfield Manufacturing Informatics Centre’s new research and research-based post-
graduate education directions include: 


– First, the study of complex, massively interconnected systems of systems’ dynamic (SOSDYN) behaviour, 
like the IIoT, of their degradation under strain, and of their state-space will be particularly useful to better 
characterise their patterns of degradation under cyber-attacks. Like Network Operations Centres are asked by 
Security Operations Centres’ staff to check systems’ state in order to confirm a cyber-attack is in progress, 





 
*** https://www-01.ibm.com/software/rational/rationalsystemarchitect-departure and https://teamblue.unicomsi.com/products/system-architect  
††† https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:13719:-1:ed-2:v1:en  
‡‡‡ https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/107018_pl.html  
§§§ https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/model-based-security-engineering-internet-things  






204 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
12 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


future cyber defence technologies embarked in the IIoT will require this kind of information for a similar 
purpose, possibly in real time or nearly so. This will help to deliver resilient reactions that will seamlessly 
preserve the IIoT’s continuity of operation. Our assumption is that, currently, we have very little knowledge 
about such complex systems’ dynamic behaviour under cyber-attack circumstances. Systems dynamics, 
complexity theory, cybersecurity, graph theory, system modelling and simulation will be part of the 
foundational disciplines to mobilise under this first umbrella. In a word, we could say that we aim at 
establishing formal models of the complex systems’ state variation dynamics and of cyber resilience dynamics, 
for use by future cyber defence technologies and by cyber defence industries and stakeholders. 


– Research on Model-Integrated Co-Engineering of systems and cybersecurity (MICE), with a view to create a 
MICE engineering and innovation platform that will serve the manufacturing, defence and aviation sectors and 
their need to improve the inclusion of cybersecurity into smart manufacturing and other complex systems. 
Model-Based Engineering, cyber risk analysis and modelling, cyber-attack patterns and cyber-vulnerabilities 
classifications described for instance in MITRE’s CAPEC (MITRE, 2018), simulation will stand at the theart 
of this research current. 


– The first two domains of research require simulation. In effect, to understand complex large-scale systems and 
systems of systems’ dynamic behaviour and the dynamics of cyber resilience in this context, one shall hardly 
be able to create a test bench at the size of a real one and with the activity of a real one. besides, in the context 
of the MICE research area, one of the difficulties to overcome will be to evaluate the impacts of architectural 
and cybersecurity design, operation and modification choices both on systems’ performance and behaviour, 
and on their cybersecurity. For this double purpose, we shall create a Large-Scale Cyber Simulator (LSCS), 
capable of virtualising systems of systems comprised of up to hundreds of thousands and even millions of 
objects (software and hardware). High Performance Computing, complex systems, hybrid simulation, multi 
agent systems, visualisation, artificial intelligence, machine learning and big analytics, energy consumption 
optimisation will be all part of this research area. The LSCS will become a platform accessible to industrial 
and governmental partners and, in the future, we envisage to interconnect it to similar large-scale simulators 
around the globe to further advance research. 


– As the need for cybersecurity certification is nowadays largely in question, and as it presents the challenge of 
mass certification in the context of a blossoming offering of connectable objects with which cyber risks may 
increase widely, our fourth area of research will relate to the possibility of automating cyber resilience tests 
and evaluations. We shall work to create the prototype of a Cybersecurity Evaluation & Testing Automation 
Platform (CETAP) that will aim to serve the needs of our partners and IT Security Evaluation Facilities 
(ITSEF) around the world. This domain will mobilise research competencies in cybersecurity, formal 
modelling, performance assurance, testing methods and technologies, artificial intelligence / machine learning. 


– Finally, because future smart manufacturing systems, as well as other complex systems and infrastructures, 
will require a cyber defence that operates at the speed of systems and events rather than at the (slow) pace of 
human operators, we shall work to develop an autonomous intelligent Multi Agent System for Cyber defence 
(MASC) technology. MASC technology will deliver autonomous cyber defence for autonomous and highly 
complex systems. We aim to reach the point where it will act seamlessly on our behalf, our “goodware” 
fighting “malware” on its own terms, without our help. However, we assume that in given – extreme – 
circumstances, MASC swarms or cohorts may find their limits and require cooperation with a human operator. 
For this purpose, we shall develop a Cyber Cognitive Cooperation (C3) technology that will allow humans to 
help MASC agents to make decisions. If multi agent systems have been somehow marginalised in recent years 
to the benefit of the big wave of machine learning and big data, this branch of artificial intelligence will be 
mobilised along with cybersecurity, complex systems research and ergonomics to deliver in the longer term a 
technology that, we assume, attackers will also develop for their own, nasty, purpose. Working patiently 
towards this goal with our industrial and defence partners will be essential. Applications for MASC 
technologies that will emerge from this stream of research will also serve the wider public as more and more 
citizens will stand at the centre of a massive system of interconnected systems of objects. 


 
In conclusion, the need for sustained industrial collaborations 






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 205
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  13 


 
The SOSDYN, MICE, LSCS, CETAP and MASC research areas do not belong in the same category: 


– SOSDYN, research on highly complex systems’ dynamics, belongs in the discovery type of research, with 
long-term goals and possibly short-term advances however hard to forecast today. Industrial collaboration will 
help the centre to create real-life use cases. 


– MICE, research on Model-Integrated Co-Engineering of systems and their cybersecurity, is closer to 
innovation but requires serious research and close collaboration with model-based engineering platform 
suppliers and large engineering project procurers. 


– LSCS, the Large Scale Cyber Simulator, is a mid-term innovative form of research. Such a large scale hybrid 
simulation capability is today required in order to research future highly complex systems. It will require not 
just investments but also real-size projects to test and validate it and its contribution to the industry, as well as 
to the SOSDYN and MICE research areas. And SOSDYN research findings will contribute to creating real 
life like patterns of behaviour and patterns of traffic generation in simulated systems. 


– CETAP, research on the Cybersecurity Evaluation & Testing Automation Platform, belongs in innovation. 
Most of the tools are available today to advance this project. However, we assume that it requires elaborating 
use cases and a strong concept of operation, as well as creating a model-based approach to integrating these 
tools. This is a mid-term project that will require collaborating with ITSEFs, the manufacturing industry and 
cyber technology suppliers. 


– MASC, the research on autonomous intelligent Multi Agent Systems for Cyber defence, is a discovery type of 
research and looks at the long term, a ten-year horizon probably. The MoD, the IoT and IIoT supply chain, as 
well as manufacturing industries and cybersecurity technology suppliers are invited to join this research 
stream. SOSDYN research findings will help augmenting agents’ situation awareness. The LSCS will help 
testing and validating the developments of the MASC technology. And the MICE research stream will look at 
how to develop MASC agents. The CETAP platform will help testing how secure MASC agents will be. 


To host this research, new labs and spaces are being set-up and will reach full power within the next two years. 
 
References 
 
Bassellier, G., Horner Reich, B. & Benbasat, I., 2001. Information Technology Competence of Business Managers: 
A Definition and Research Model. Journal of Management Information Systems, 17(4), pp. 159-182. 
Bechtold, J., Kern, A., Lauenstein, C. & Bernhofer, L., 2014. Industry 4.0 - The Capgemini Consulting View. 
Sharpening the Picture beyond the Hype, Available from 
https://www.capgemini.com/consulting/resources/industry4-0/#: Capgemini Consulting. 
Bista, S., Bista, P. & Rana, V. K., 2013. The impact of Software Defined Networking on the network infrastructures 
of enterprise networks and the growing ISP industry of Nepal. Park Village Resort, Nepal, 7th NASCoIT 
conference, 28th September 2013, 
https://nascoit.org.np/papers/The%20impact%20of%20Software%20Defined%20Networking.pdf. 
Blakely, B. & Theron, P., 2018. Decision flow-based Agent Action Planning. Prague, 18-20 October 2017: 
https://export.arxiv.org/pdf/1804.07646. 
Bodeau, D. J. & Graubart, R., 2011. Cyber resiliency engineering framework, Bedford, MA: MITRE, MITRE 
Technical Report MTR110237. 
CISCO, 2014. Addressing the Full Attack Continuum. A New Security Model for Before, During, and After an 
Attack, http://www.cisco.com/go/security: CISCO. 
COM(2017) 477 final, 2017. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on ENISA, 
the "EU Cybersecurity Agency", and repealing Regulation (EU) 526/2013, and on Information and Communication 
Technology cybersecurity certification (''Cybersecurity Act''), Brussels: European Commission. 
ETSI, 2017. Quantum Safe Cryptography; Case Studies and Deployment Scenarios, Nice Sophia Antipolis, France: 
ETSI - ETSI GR QSC 003 V1.1.1 (2017-02). 
European Commission - DG JLS, 2011. A study on measures to analyse and improve European emergency 
preparedness in the field of fixed and mobile telecommunications and Internet., Brussels: European Commission, 
EC JLS/2008/D1/018 study, http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/nis/strategy/prep_study/index_en.htm. 






206 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207
14 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing  00 (2018) 000–000 


European Commission, 2017. EU cybersecurity initiatives. Working towards a more secure online environment, 
Brussels: European Commission, http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/document/2017-
3/factsheet_cybersecurity_update_january_2017_41543.pdf. 
Evans, S., 2016. Manufacturing and Industrial Evolution – the future. Cranfield, UK, Manufacturing 2075 
conference, Cranfield University, December 7th 2016. 
Fairbanks, R. J. & Caplan, S., 2004. Poor Interface Design and Lack of Usability Testing Facilitate Medical Error. 
The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Safety, 30(10), pp. 579-584. 
Ferber, S., 2012. Industry 4.0: Agility in production?. [Online]  
Available at: https://blog.bosch-si.com/industry40/industry-4-0-agility-in-production 
[Accessed 11 July 2018]. 
Ganek, A. G. & Corbi, T. A., 2003. The dawning of the autonomic computing era. IBM Systems Journal, 42(1), pp. 
5-18. 
Gates, D. & Bremicker, M., 2017. Beyond the hype. Separating ambition from reality in i4.0, Switzerland: KPMG 
International. 
Guth, J. et al., 2018. A Detailed Analysis of IoT Platform Architectures: Concepts, Similarities, and Differences. In: 
B. Di Martino, K. Li, L. T. Yang & A. Esposito, eds. Internet of Everything: Algorithms, Methodologies, 
Technologies and Perspectives. Singapore: Springer-Verlag, pp. 81-101. 
JOIN(2017) 450 final, 2017. JOIN(2017) 450 final - Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the 
Council. Resilience, Deterrence and Defence: Building strong cybersecurity for the EU, Brussels: European 
Commission - High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security policy. 
Kott, A. et al., 2018. Initial Reference Architecture of an Intelligent Autonomous Agent for Cyber Defense, Adelphi, 
MD: US Army Research Laboratory, ARL-TR-8337, March 2018, available from https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10664. 
LeBlanc, B., Losiewicz, P. & Hourlier, S., 2017. A Program for effective and secure operations by Autonomous 
Agents and Human Operators in communications constrained tactical environments. Prague: NATO IST-152 
workshop. 
Liang, C.-W. & Hsu, J. Y.-j., 2014. Auction-Based Resource Access Protocols in IoT Service Systems. IEEE, IEEE 
7th International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications. 
Lie, E., Macmillan, R. & Keck, R., 2009. The Role and Responsibilities of an Effective Regulator, Geneva, 
Switzerland: International Telecommunication Union, www.itu.int/ITU-
D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/GSR09/papers.html. 
Lopez, D., Reid, A., Manzalini, A. & Odini, M.-P., 2016. Impact of SDN/NFV on Business Models. IEEE 
Softwarization, 2016(January), pp. online at https://sdn.ieee.org/newsletter/january-2016/impact-of-sdn-nfv-on-
business-models. 
Mahmud, R., Kotagiri, R. & Buyya, R., 2018. Fog Computing: A Taxonomy, Survey and Future Directions. In: K. 
L. L. T. Y. &. A. E. B. Di Martino, ed. Internet of Everything: Algorithms, Methodologies, Technologies and 
Perspectives. Singapore: Springer-Verlag, pp. 103-130. 
Marsh, P., 2016. Global manufacturing: the next 100 years. Cranfield, UK, Manufacturing 2075 conference, 
Cranfield University, December 7th 2016 . 
Mikolic-Torreira, I. et al., 2016. A framework for exploring cybersecurity policy options, Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation. 
MITRE, 2018. Cybersecurity Standards. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.mitre.org/capabilities/cybersecurity/overview/cybersecurity-resources/standards 
[Accessed 23 May 2018]. 
NIST, 2014. Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, U.S. Department of Commerce: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
NIST, 2018. Draft NISTIR 8200. Interagency Report on Status of International Cybersecurity Standardization for 
the Internet of Things (IoT), Gaithersburg, MD: NIST - Interagency International Cybersecurity Standardization 
Working Group (IICS WG). 
Ottawa Citizen, 2017. Why you should be 'suitably paranoid' about your home devices' cybersecurity. [Online]  
Available at: https://ottawacitizen.com/news/canada/are-you-suitably-paranoid-about-your-home-devices-
cybersecurity/wcm/8b34e06b-2930-4099-b390-4cb6e1c0bb48 
[Accessed 10 July 2018]. 
Shaikh, S., 2015. Cyber Security, an Age of Paranoia?. [Online]  






 Paul Theron  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018) 193–207 207
 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2018) 000–000  15 


Available at: https://www.btplc.com/Innovation/Innovationnews/BTTowerTalk/index.htm 
[Accessed 10 July 2018]. 
Sniderman, B., Mahto, M. & Cotteleer, M. J., 2016. Industry 4.0 and manufacturing ecosystems. Exploring the 
world of connected enterprises, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited: Deloitte University Press. 
Sterbenz, J. et al., September 2002. Survivable Mobile Wireless Networks: Issues, Challenges, and Research 
Directions, Atlanta, Georgia: Paper presented at WiSe’02. 
Sterbenz, J. P. et al., 2010. Resilience and Survivability in Communication Networks: Strategies, Principles, and 
Survey of Disciplines. Computer Networks, June, 54(8), pp. 1245-1265. 
Theron, P., 2013. ICT Resilience as Dynamic Process and Cumulative Aptitude. In: P. Theron & S. Bologna, eds. 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection and Resilience in the ICT Sector. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp. 1-35. 
Theron, P., 2016. Introduction to the European IACS components Cybersecurity Certification Framework (ICCF), 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. 
Theron, P., 2016. Lessons and Needs for Improving Critical Infrastructures’ Resilience. 10 August.pp. Available at 
http://cip.gmu.edu/2016/08/10/lessons-needs-improving-critical-infrastructures-resilience/. 
Theron, P. et al., 2019. For an autonomous cyber defense of autonomous and complex military systems. NATO’s 
AICARA reference architecture for autonomous intelligent cyber defense agents. In: E. t. b. confirmed, ed. 
Foundations of Autonomous Adaptive Cyber Systems (Provisional title). Berlin, Germany: Springer, p. TBD. 
Theron, P. & Lazari, A., 2018. IACS Cybersecurity Certification Framework (ICCF): Lessons and enhancements 
from 2017 experiments, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. 
Trimintzios, P. et al., 2017. Cybersecurity in the EU Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). Challenges and 
risks for the EU, Brussels: European Parliamentary Research Service, Scientific Foresight Unit (STOA), 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa. 
U.S. Department of Energy, 2013. Cybersecurity Is Every Citizen's Responsibility. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.energy.gov/articles/cybersecurity-every-citizens-responsibility 
[Accessed 10 July 2018]. 
UN-DESA, 2011. Cybersecurity: A global issue demanding a global approach. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/ecosoc/cybersecurity-demands-global-approach.html 
[Accessed 10 July 2018]. 
Vicino, D., Lung, C.-H., Wainer, G. & Dalle, O., 2014. Evaluating the impact of Software-Defined Networks’ 
Reactive Routing on BitTorrent performance. Procedia Computer Science, 34(2014), pp. 668 – 673, proceedings of 
the International Workshop on Software Defined Networks for a New Generation of Applications and Services 
(SDN-NGAS-2014). 
Wikipedia, 27 March 2018. List of automation protocols. [Online]  
Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_automation_protocols 
[Accessed 28 June 2018]. 
 
 




