









International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220


Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect


International Journal of Accounting
Information Systems

On IT governance structures and their effectiveness in
collaborative organizational structures


Acklesh Prasad a,⁎, Peter Green b, Jon Heales b


a QUT Business School, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, Australia
b UQ Business School, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia

a r t i c l e i n f o

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: acklesh.prasad@qut.edu.au (A.


(J. Heales).


1467-0895/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.005

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 10 May 2011
Accepted 1 June 2012

Organizations today engage in various forms of alliances to manage
their existing business processes or to diversify into new processes to
sustain their competitive positions. Many of today's alliances use the
IT resources as their backbone. The results of these alliances are
collaborative organizational structures with little or no ownership
stakes between the parties. The emergence of Web 2.0 tools is having
a profound effect on the nature and form of these alliance structures.
These alliances heavily depend on and make radical use of the IT
resources in a collaborative environment. This situation requires a
deeper understanding of the governance of these IT resources to
ensure the sustainability of the collaborative organizational struc-
tures. This study first suggests the types of IT governance structures
required for collaborative organizational structures. Semi-structured
interviews with senior executives who operate in such alliances
reveal that co-created IT governance structures are necessary. Such
structures include co-created IT steering committees, co-created
operational committees, and inter-organizational performance man-
agement and communication systems. The findings paved the way for
the development of a model for understanding approaches to
governing IT and evaluating the effectiveness for such governance
mechanisms in today's IT‐dependent alliances. This study presents a
sustainable IT-related capabilities approach to assessing the effec-
tiveness of suggested IT governance structures for collaborative
alliances. The findings indicate a favorable association between
organizations' IT governance efforts and their ability to sustain their
capabilities to leverage their IT resources. These IT-related capabilities
also relate to measures business value at the process and firm level.

Keywords:
Collaborative organizational structures
IT governance
Dynamic capabilities
Co-created resources
Web 2.0 tools
Sustainable IT-related capabilities

Prasad), p.green@business.uq.edu.au (P. Green), j.heales@business.uq.edu.au


All rights reserved.



http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.005

mailto:acklesh.prasad@qut.edu.au

mailto:p.green@business.uq.edu.au

mailto:j.heales@business.uq.edu.au

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.005

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/14670895




200 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

This makes it possible to infer that collaborative organizations' IT
governance efforts contribute to business value.


© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction


Organizations engage in various strategic alliances to develop new business models for competitive
advantage (Mayer and Teece, 2008). Conventional strategies include hierarchical relations, joint venture
equity investments, cooperatives, cartels, and franchising. Today, organizations have information technology
(IT), a dynamic tool, to expand their strategic alliances. This dynamic tool is making organizations rethink
their strategies for effective use of their bundle of resources (Barney, 1991). As a result, new forms of
corporate structures are now emerging. This situationmeans doing business today is about bringing disparate
collaborative resources together. The result is emergence of new forms of corporate alliances, and extended
alliances with geographically dispersed parties. These new forms of alliances are termed collaborative
organizational structures (COS), or collaborative alliance, which are alliances developed with IT resources as
their backbone. For example, organizations venturing into e-commerce initiatives will form alliances with
courier companies for logistics, and finance-related organizations for payment facilitation.


The relentless march of computing power and internet connection speeds are bringing profound changes
to the business environment. These resources are a major catalyst for the new trends of strategic alliances. A
new group of technology, the Web 2.0 tools, has emerged. Web 2.0 tools are a new generation of
Internet-based collaborative tools that allow users to interact and collaborate with each other in a social
environment (Kane and Fichman, 2009). The Web 2.0 communities are consumers and creators of
user-generated content in a virtual community. Initially consumed by individuals, the Web 2.0 technologies
today are transforming conventional enterprises into enterprise 2.0 (McAfee, 2009). For example, British
Telecom has introduced a hugeWikipedia-style database called BTpedia, a central blogging tool, a podcasting
tool, project collaboration software and enterprise social networking. That is, IT-driven communication and
collaboration are the backbone of the alliances in this environment. Demand-driven supply chain networks,
collaborating on corporate data on social networks, digital supply chains, virtual teams, mass customization,
vendor-managed inventories, and vendor-managed assembly lines are prevalent forms of business
organizations and activities in the IT‐intensive alliances of today. Corporate structures are transforming
into virtual expanded organizations, which leverage the IT resources to reduce operational costs. The result is
complex digital alliances with increased dependence on shared IT resources.


These new forms of business structures present new risks and challenges (Kane and Fichman, 2009;
Turban and Volonino, 2011). Organizationsmake radical use of the IT resourceswithin these businessmodels.
The dependency on IT also increases in these new forms of business collaborations. This dependency means
new forms of IT governance requirements and guidelines to manage these risks and challenges. The new
organizational structures will have new forms of IT resource integration, requiring new methods of
governance to ensure information flows satisfy the established control objectives. That is, executives of the
alliance partners will organize themselves differently to leverage the IT resources in the new business
environment. While there is much conferred about the new forms of IT-enabled business structures, the
governance mechanisms of their IT backbone have not received any resolute attention. It is reasonable to
assume that the success and growth of these new forms of collaboration will be contingent upon appropriate
IT governance structures and processes, just as it has within organizations (Weill and Ross, 2004). Of course,
extant literature suggests various IT governance structures to manage the IT resources in organizations (for
example, Sambamurthy and Zmud, 1999;Weill and Ross, 2004; Bowen et al., 2007; Prasad et al., 2010). These
IT governance structures, however, are pertinent for the use of ITwithin organizations. The radical use of IT in
COS requires a rethink on the viable forms of IT governance structures suitable for shared IT resources.


Accordingly, we address the following two key questions in this research. What are the effective IT
governance structures for COS? How do we evaluate the effectiveness of these IT governance structures?
An initial interpretive research design, using semi-structured interviews with contacts from collabora-
tive alliances, revealed four forms of IT governance structures for the collaborative alliances. These
structures include co-created lateral IT steering committees, co-created operational committees, and
inter-organizational performance management and communication systems. Extant literature suggests






Fig. 1. Conceptual model.


201A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

that the IT-related capabilities obtain performance-differentiating value from the IT resources (Mata et al.,
1995; Wade and Hulland, 2004). IT-related capabilities are organizations' unique knowhow of their IT
resources. Because IT resources are dynamic, organizations' abilities to leverage their IT resources uniquely are
contingent upon their ability to sustain their IT-related capabilities. Sustainable IT-related capabilities will
ensure better application of IT resources to the business processes, which will eventually contribute to
organizations overall firm-level performance. Based on the findings of the initial interpretive investigation and
the above discussion, we suggest the following conceptual model of effective IT governance for COS (Fig. 1).


Field survey data from 118 senior IT and business managers showed that the suggested IT governance
structures for COS lead to sustainable IT-related capabilities. These sustainable IT-related capabilities improve
the internal processes of the collaborative alliances. The improved internal processes help organizationsmanage
their external processes. The internal-external process coordination then contributes to firm-level business
value. Overall, themodel implies that the suggested effective IT governance structures for COSwill lead to better
business value for the COS partners. This paper progresses as follows. The next section presents an overview of
IT governance. This follows discussion of the theoretical framework of this study. This follows the interpretive
design to understand the IT governance for COS, and its outcome. We then develop a model for effective IT
governance for COS. This follows discussion of the research design.We then present the results of this study. The
final sections discuss the results, contributions, and implications of this study to theory and practice.


2. An overview of IT governance and strategic alliances


IT governance, focusing on information and IT assets, specifies the decision rights and accountability
framework to encourage desirable behavior in the use of IT (Weill and Ross, 2004). This behavior relates to the
form of the leadership, and organizational structures and processes that ensure that the organization's IT
sustains and extends the organization's strategies and objectives (IT Governance Institute, 2007). IT
governance essentially places structure around how organizations IT strategy aligns with business strategy.
This IT-business alignment will ensure that organizations continue to achieve their strategies and goals, and
implementing ways to evaluate its performance. One special aspect of IT governance is that it considers
interests of all stakeholders and ensures that processes provide measurable results. This situation is possible
with lateral IT governance structures, with involvement from all levels of management (Prasad et al., 2010).


Organizations can follow a few supporting mechanisms to guide their implementation of IT governance in
organizations. The Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) is an approach to
standardize good information technology security and control practices. COBIT provides tools to assess and
measure the performance of 34 IT processes of an organization (IT Governance Institute, 2007). The ISO/IEC
38500:2008, corporate governance of information technology, provides a framework for effective governance of
IT to assist those at the highest level of organizations (International Organisation for Standardization, 2008). The
standard assists top management to understand and fulfill their legal, regulatory, and ethical obligations in
respect of their organizations' use of IT. The COSO framework, developed by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) provides guidance to organizations on critical aspects of
organizational governance, business ethics, internal control, enterprise risk management, fraud, and financial
reporting (COSO, 2009).


Organizations forming strategic alliances are not recent phenomena. However, developments in IT mean
these alliances are changing in their form and structure (Langfield-Smith, 2008; Mayer and Teece, 2008;
Weber and Chathoth, 2008). The competitive forces within today's turbulent business environment compel
organizations to forge voluntary relationships for co-creation, co-development, and innovation (de Rond,
2003). Current IT resources enable formation of innovative organizational alliances— the COS. Such alliances
function on a cooperative IT platform. Cooperative IT platforms would require different IT governance
structures tomonitor andmanage the IT assets. Such governance structures require some aspect of dynamism
to capitalize on emerging opportunities to sustain the alliances' competitive position. That is, IT governance
becomes a shared responsibilitywithin the collaborative organizational structures. This dynamism is possible






202 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

with some form of between-organization collaboration. The dynamic capabilities theoretical framework is
one possible basis for suggesting and explaining such across-organizational collaboration to govern the IT
resources. We discuss this framework in the next section.


3. Theoretical framework


Organizations are made up of a bundle of resources (Barney, 1991). Some of these resources are unique to
organizations, allowing them to achieve distinctive outcomes compared to other organizations (Mata et al.,
1995). Such distinctive outcomes, however, may be of little value in a collaborative atmosphere, because
valuable outcomes in a collaborative environment are those that benefit all partners of the collaborative alliance.
The product of combination of organizations' unique outcomes can help them manage the shared resources
(Grant, 2008). That is, the resources would combine to form higher-level resources, which in the case of IT
governance, are the co-created governance structures. A higher-level resource is the product of unique
combinations (co-creation) of organizations distinctive resources and capabilities. The dynamic capabilities
theoretical framework explains this level of resource organization, and forms the key basis for suggesting IT
governance structures for collaborative alliances.


The higher-level resources are also dynamic resources with difficult-to-imitate combinations of
organizational, functional and technological skills (Teece, 2007). Dynamic resources are those that adapt to
the changing environments (Thomas, 1996). These resources form the foundation uponwhich distinctive and
difficult‐to‐imitate advantages can be built, maintained and enhanced (Teece et al., 1997). Organizations that
collaborate would appear to renew their collaborative competencies through innovative responses by
appropriately adapting, integrating, and reconfiguring internal and external organizational skills, resources,
and functional competencies (Teece et al., 1997). Dynamic IT governance structures are essential to achieve
this outcome. Organizations past choices influence domains of competence, and at any given time,
organizations must follow a certain trajectory of competence development (Teece et al., 1997).


Organizations can improve organization of certain types of economic activities internally (Coase, 1937).
Competencies and capabilities, like governance structures, resulting from organizing and getting things done
internally are the key components in sustaining advantages (Coase, 1937). This situation is because internal
organization takes place in amoremultilateral fashion,with patterns of behavior and learning orchestrated in
a much more decentralized fashion (Teece et al., 1997). Processes, paths, and positions are factors that can
help determine organizations distinctive competence and dynamic capabilities. These competencies and
capabilities embed in organizational processes of one kind or another. The shared innovative changes
between these processes explain the essence of the organizations dynamic capabilities and competitive
advantage (Teece et al., 1997). The processes of collaborative alliance have a high level of coherence within
themselves. The coherence provides the capabilities, and a cohesive set of inter-organizational linkages that is
difficult to mimic. Shared IT resources across organizations require such coherent governance structures for
their effectivemanagement. Partner organizations possess a hierarchy of capabilities, and general and broadly
defined capabilities emerge from an integration of more specialized capabilities (Grant, 2008).


Governance of IT resources within collaborative organizational structures would require some form of
inter-organizational linkages. The recursive IT governance-related learning would appear to be an important
catalyst for continued success of collaborative structures. Organizations, thus, need to collaborate in various
fronts within their collaborative structures to embrace both the sharing and management of resources. The
dynamic capabilities lens forms the basis for exploring various forms of inter-organizational IT governance
structures required to manage IT resources within COS. This effort must commence with a deeper
understanding of the nature of the COS and the associated IT governance structures.


4. IT governance structures in IT-dependent collaborative alliances


The changed conditions of the IT-driven COS requires new structures of IT governance. The dynamic
capabilities theoretical framework suggests a collective effort in governing the IT resources. The eventual
objective of this study is to propose a model of IT governance and its evaluation within the COS. To the best
of our knowledge, extant literature inadequately informs the nature and composition of the IT governance
mechanisms, let alone providing empirical support for such mechanisms, for collaborative organizational






203A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

structures. A deeper understanding of the reality of the COS is required before we could suggest a model of
IT governance and their effectiveness for COS.


Our overall research design includes an interpretive component and a field survey. We use these research
methods consecutively. The outcomes of our interpretive design, the suggested IT governance structures for
COS, become the key component of our field survey. We discuss our interpretive approach next, and the
survey design in Section 6, which follows the development of hypotheses and the researchmodel. A common
approach to unpacking the diversity of issues involved in governance of IT resources within COS is to
undertake an interpretive case study (Yin, 1994). The interpretive approach affords an in-depth look at the
dynamic relationship that exists between partner organizations in governing the IT resources. This approach
considers the shared meanings and experiences of the people involved (Walsham, 1995). One interprets
these items from the perspectives of the individuals themselves, given that multiple realities exist in the
organization, shaped by their experiences and actions. This effort becomes instrumental in making
generalized assertions on the mechanics of governance of IT resources in a collaborative environment.


A large number of organizations today engage in some form of IT-related collaborative alliances (Turban
and Volonino, 2011). Acquiring a deeper understanding of the possible IT governance structures within the
collaborative alliances would mean extracting reality from the organizations that are at the forefront of using
such alliances. Successful operation of the IT-dependent alliances implies existence of appropriate IT
governance structures. We approached twelve organizations that are heavily involved in across-organization
IT-dependent collaboration to manage their business processes. These organizations collaborate to manage
their digital supply chain,manage e-channels and logistics,manage tourismand leisure services, and engage in
collaborative commerce.We explained the purpose of the study to the organizations, the personnel of interest,
and thenature of their involvement in this exercise. Five organizations agreed to participate in the study. These
five organizations engage in various forms of IT-related collaboration to manage their processes.


From these five organizations, sixteen potential contacts volunteered to be interviewed. Each
semi-structured interview lasted about thirty minutes. Table 1 presents the demographics of the interviewees.
The collection of data from different management levels permits the elicitation of multiple viewpoints from
individuals within the same division to contrast across divisions. The intent of this approach is to identify
common conceptions that represent key structures for effective IT governance in COS. The interviews were
semi-structured. The opening question was very general, seeking opinion on governance structures for
collaborative organizational structures. The interviews then progressed with some focus around the co-created
IT governance structures, but with enough flexibility to capture perceptions on various perspectives of IT
governance.


We transcribed and analyzed the interview data for its thematic content, which involved identification
of a number of conceptions relating to possible IT governance structures in COS. The conceptions related to
co-created governance structures and provided a narrative of the mechanics of such structures. This

Table 1
Interviewee demographics.


Interviewee Position Age Industry Experience (years)


1 IT Manager 36 Retailing 8
2 Chief Information Officer (CIO) 41 Manufacturing 12
3 Manager Logistics 32 Transportation 13
4 Managing Director 55 Retailing 15
5 IT Manager 33 Communication 6
6 CIO 38 Banking 20
7 Department Manager 28 Distribution 6
8 Department Manager 29 Distribution 8
9 CIO 35 Banking 21
10 IT Manager 42 Retailing 8
11 Director Operations 49 Banking 12
12 CIO 48 Manufacturing 3
13 IT Manager 33 Communication 5
14 Operations Manager 39 Manufacturing 16
15 IT Manager 34 Distribution 13
16 Division Manager 45 Communication 12






Table 2
Broad conceptions and themes for IT governance in collaborative organizational structures.


Broad conceptions Key themes


Co-Created IT Steering Committee Shared IT Governance, Shared Resource Ownership, Lateral Decision Making, Broader
Adaptation of the IT Resource


Inter-Organizational Lateral
Communication System


Extensive Partner Communication, Alliance-Based Communication, Leveraging the Web
2.0 Communication and Collaboration Tools,


Inter-Organizational Performance
Management System


Broader Metrics for Evaluating Performance, Shared Alliance Responsibilities, IT-Based
Alliance Evaluation


Co-Created Operational Systems
Committee


Operational Coordination, Operational Alignment, Operational Consistency


204 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

analysis helped to substantiate the co-created governance investigative framework. The conceptions
emerged using the following steps (Dey, 1993). First was the establishment of the unit of analysis, which
were the concepts from the interviewee's expressions ranging from a few words to complete sentences.
The second step was code attachment, which act as labels on the unit of analysis and represent the
conceptions prevalent in that section of text. The third step involved conception categorization into
broader conceptions. These above steps required numerous read and analysis of the interview transcripts.
We also provided copies of the transcribed notes and thematic analysis to the interviewees for verification
and additional comments to ensure validity of our analysis.


Four broad conceptions emerged from the analysis of data. Table 2 summarizes the formations of these
four broad conceptions. The following sections discuss these four broad conceptions.


4.1. Co-created IT steering committee


Co-created IT steering committee relates to the concept of sharing the management of IT resources
within COS. The concept of sharing the management of IT resources in COS was a prevalent view of the
interviewees. The interviewees suggested that the partners have some level ownership of the IT resources
that form the COS. A sense of shared ownership of the resources was evident in the interviewees' views.
This view persists even if they do not physically own such resources. One interviewee suggested:

“I think that in a collaborative environment, partners need to come to consensus on the benefit of the
acquired IT resources. It is important that all parties are part of the decision-making, and see the value of IT
in their organizations. This is only possible if all parties sit together and sort the issues out. When IT tries to
benefit all parties in an alliance, individual partner decisions may be of little use.” T3

Another interviewee shared the following:

“I know this may not be easily done but an IT resource in a collaborative organizational structure must
be valuable to all. If it is not suitable to one party, then the effort may not be adequate. The only way I see
this happening is when all parties discuss the IT adoption strategy together and come to consensus. The
way I see it is at all partners have a stake in the success of a IT project, so all need to come together to
make sure that a share of their success is justified. Even if it means changing the business rules.” T2

The comments also indicate that organizations will need to establish new forms of cultures and
structures to manage the IT resources that facilitate COS. Organizations need to adopt a liberal approach to
IT governance where benefit beyond the organization needs consideration. A lateral across-organization
decision-making structure is critical to ensure that IT resources provide adequate business value to all
parties in IT-related alliances. The interviewees also shared the following views on this point.

“Look, we have come to a stage in business where our success may only come in an embracive business
environment. IT has broken many barriers and we have weaker boundaries between organizations. If we
are to survive, we are to work together – not only in sharing resources, but also in making decisions
regarding those resources.” T10






205A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

“We need to work together to get the full benefits of IT in today's environment. We may not get much if


we are too self-centered or become too complacent about what IT can do for us. We must build alliances
and in various dimensions and work for the good of all parties.” T8

4.2. Inter-organizational lateral communication


Inter-organizational lateral communication systems relate to the concept of expanding communication and
collaborationwithin the organizations in the collaborative alliance. The interviewees considered this an essential
IT governance structure. Organizations need to adopt a flexible approach with their relationship management
and they should bewilling to share their knowledge beyond their organization. The interviewees shared that an
open communication approach with the will to share views and thoughts on the implications of current and
prospective IT resources to the alliance is essential. This environmentwill accrue the alliance knowledge base on
how best to leverage a shared IT infrastructure. Many interviewees shared that there is a need to embed this
aspect of IT governance in their process-related interactions. This embedding requires extensive use of web 2.0
tools, perhaps in conjunction with other stakeholders. Much of this communication and collaboration may be
informal. That is, good governance of IT resources should include considering their values recurrently in an
interactive environment. Below are some of the views that the interviewees shared on this aspect.

“I think we need to pay special attention to how we share our views here. While we may meet formally to
discuss our IT backbone, we need to have amuchmore open communication channels to share our views in a
muchmore regular basis. Of course, this is not going to be easy, as each organizationwould like tomaintain its
competitive position. But, greater benefit in today's IT-intensive environment will come from how we share
our IT-related knowledge with the alliance.” T11

“I think the Web 2.0 tools itself is a key instrument for IT governance in today's business environment.
We need to think about our IT 24/7 as this will determine how we can strengthen our alliance. We need
to engage much more in a virtual context, and be available and thinking all the time about our IT. This
too, must not be within us, but much more with others. In fact, I strongly feel that we need to make the
‘them’ into ‘us.’” T14


“Two things must go hand-in-hand in today's IT dependent environment. One is doing business with
others and the other is continually talking about business with others. These two aspects are very
important and we must make sure that there is a vibrant informal communication going on all the time.
There is no excuse for lack of this with the availability of rich virtual communication tools. We can only
manage IT when we know all we need to know about IT.” T3

4.3. Inter-organizational performance systems


Inter-organizational performance systems relate to the concept of evaluating the performance of an
organization in a collaborative alliance within broader collaborative-based performance matrices. The
interviewees considered this as an important IT governance structure for COS. This requirement is a
difficult feat to achieve as the alliances in COS are less formal with no or thin ownership stakes. However,
performance management systems that align the objectives of COS with future alliance agreements or
reward structures would ensure the longevity of the collaborative arrangements. Misaligned perfor-
mances would result in suboptimal use of the IT resources between the organizations. The result of this
action would affect the entire alliance, despite full commitment by some. Presence of some form of
opportunity cost for suboptimal performance is necessary for the effective use of the IT resources within
the alliances. The interviewees shared the following views on this concept of IT governance for COS.

“There has to be someway to share the responsibilities. If we do not share responsibilities, wemay get into the
concept of free riders. Thiswill not be good for the alliance. One of theways this could be achieved is to evaluate
performance of the structure rather than individuals. This could also be done in a hierarchical manner, where
the performance of organizations is cumulated into the overall alliance performance. While I think it is






206 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

important that IT-related decisions are made with the interest of the organizations, the broader benefit of the
alliance must also always come in consideration.” T15

“I think there is a need to review what an organization is doing for others. This is especially important, as in
today's environment, the benefit of IT will only emerge if it is shared across organizations. Motivation for
such initiative can only come with parallel performance systems.” T8

“One important issue that I see for governance of IT resources with shared benefits is shared performance
evaluation. There will be issues if performance is disintegrated from the structure of the collaborative use of IT
resources. Performance also needs to be considered as one. I think there needs to be a broader metrics for
performance evaluations in today's interconnected business environments.” T11

4.4. Co-created operational systems


Co-created operational systems committee relates to the concept of inter-organizational cohesion by
operational managers at the process level. Organizations consume most of the IT resources at the process
levels. This situation presents an interesting shift from strategic and performance issues to operational
issues. The interviewees felt that operational level management staff is important within the COS. While
the IT-related alliances emerge for various purposes, they all relate to managing various forms of business
operations. That is, due consideration to the processes is essential. The interviewees suggested some form
of formal assembly of operational level management to ensure operational alignment between the parties
in an alliance. Some of their views are as follows.

“I think there needs to be regular meetings at the operational level. This is a must for good IT governance
for IT-related joint organizational structures. We may discuss a lot at the top level, but we may not be
too successful if we do not coordinate our activities at the lower levels. There is much happening at the
lower level that needs adequate attention.” T7

“One aspect that I think is an important way to govern IT resources is to focus on aligning the operations
of the parties in an IT-related alliance. This is only possible with regular and open between-organization
communication and collaboration at the operations level. We need to ensure that we not only make
decisions to get the right IT tools for the group, but also to use it in the right way for the benefit of all in
the group.” T6

“One group of people that need to blendwell in today's business arrangements is the low level management.
Much of the IT is used to manage and coordinate the processes. We need to have formal structure at this
level. Perhaps we need to establish a committee that meets at regular interval andmanage the coordination
of processes between the parties in this group. This is very important for operational good of the group. One
of the reasons we make alliances outside an organization is because we can do better with them compared
to doing things ourselves. But if we do not communicate and share our positionwith our operations, wemay
achieve very little.” T15

4.5. Summary


COS present challenges in managing the involved IT resources. A rethink of IT governance structures for
such dynamic and fragile alliances is required. The proliferation of Web 2.0 resources mean that
organizations' engagement into collaborative alliances would appear to grow exponentially. Similarly, our
thinking of effective ways to govern the IT resources in this environment must incorporate this
environment. A deeper understanding to manage the IT resources in this environment is important to
develop a model for effective IT governance for COS. Interpretive interaction presents important industry
views on the IT governance structures required to manage the IT resources. The interviewees provide
important insights based on their experiences with operating in collaborative alliances.


The four structures discussed above embrace various IT-related governance aspects of the COS. This set
includes structures for governing IT at the strategic and operational levels by the alliance partners. Such






207A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

lateral IT governance design is important to ensure consideration on IT at decision-making (strategic) and
at the IT-usage (operational) levels. The result of this approach would be a comprehensive consideration
on IT by the alliance as whole. This approach will also ensure a fit between the IT adoption decisions and
the IT‐usage decisions. A salient issue is that organizations need to make these considerations in a
collective environment— in a co-created environment. Individual governance initiatives by partners in the
alliance may prove futile because the alliances need to evaluate the success in totality.


An open communication system for managing the IT resources is also important within today's
collaborative organizational structures because much of the strength of today's alliance structures rests
with the level of understanding of themechanics of the collaboration. Absence of ownership-based alliance,
which occurs in the COS, means that trust and integrity will play an important role in the sustainability of
these structures. Open across-organization communication regarding the adoption and use of IT is essential
in this context. Indeed, it may be the most important IT governance structure with today's alliances.
Fostering this form of communication will require much sacrifice in terms of sharing corporate strengths
relating to IT. Accordingly, an important complementary IT governance structure would be a congruent
alliance-based performancemeasurement system. Such a systemmay be a difficult venturewithin COS, but
is an important IT governance mechanism to ensure continued trust in the alliance.


The interpretive study informs us about the IT governance structures for collaborative alliances.
Understanding on the IT governance structures only, however, is not enough to promote a representation of
IT governance for COS. A mechanism to evaluate the effectiveness of the IT governance structures is also
required. Prasad et al. (2010) suggest a capabilities-based approach for assessing the effectiveness of IT
governance structures. This study adopts a similar approach in evaluating the effectiveness of IT governance
structures for collaborative organizational structures. We extend this approach and argue that organizations'
IT governance structures should help organizations sustain their IT-related capabilities.


Sustainable IT-related capabilities will ensure that organizations continue to leverage the potential of
available IT resources. This means that organizations level of sustainable IT-related capabilities are the ideal
measure of the effectiveness of their IT governance structures. Organizations' ability to leverage their IT resources
with their sustainable IT-related capabilities should relate to their ability to improve their process-level
performance. Improvement business processes should then lead tofirm-level performance. Fig. 2 conceptualizes
this approach.

Fig. 2. Extended conceptual model.



image of Fig.�2




208 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

5. Hypothesis development


5.1. IT governance structures, sustainable IT-related capabilities and measures of business value


Prior research suggests the IT-related capabilities, and their nature of relationships to various measures
of performance (e.g., Mata et al., 1995; Feeny and Willcocks, 1998; Byrd, 2001). Organizations' IT-related
capabilities contribute to various measures of IT-related business value (Powell and Dent-Micallef, 1997;
Santhanam and Hartono, 2003; Wade and Gravill, 2003; Ray et al., 2005). IT resources, however, are dynamic
and evolve exponentially. These new resources provide organizations with new opportunities to sustain their
competitive advantage.


This aspect is the driving force behind the COS. For example, organizations are digitizing their supply
chains with RFID technologies, and engaging in collaborative commerce with richer social networking
tools. Organizations that are part of COS require sustainable IT-related capabilities to leverage the
dynamic IT resources. Sustainable IT-related capabilities are organizations' unique IT-related resources
that leverage the potential of the new IT resources.


A supported way to evaluate the effectiveness of IT governance structures is to understand their ability to
contribute to building these IT-related capabilities (Prasad et al., 2010). This study extends this notion and
suggests that effective IT governance structures in COS should help an organization sustain their IT-related
capabilities. That is, IT governance structures should contribute towards the development of sustainable
IT-related capabilities. Research has identified a number of IT-related capabilities that are a source of IT-related
business value, in particular, the IT-related management capabilities, and IT-related infrastructure capabilities.


Two IT-related management capabilities — top management commitment towards IT and shared
organizational knowledge between and unit and IT managers, and one IT-related infrastructure capability—
flexible IT infrastructure have featured prominently in IT‐business value research. These capabilities focus on
the top-level and the middle-level management, and on a organization's IT infrastructure. Together, they
appear to constitute key IT-related business elements, and their sustainability would ensure appropriate
business value of the acquired IT resources.


We evaluate the IT governance structures for COS against these sustainable IT-related capabilities and
subsequently to processes and firm‐level measures of business value to obtain a deeper understanding of
the effectiveness of such governance structures. Fig. 3 presents this research model representing the above
arguments. The following sections provide detailed description of the research model.

Fig. 3. Research model.



image of Fig.�3




209A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

5.2. IT governance structures in COS and sustainable top management commitment towards IT


Successful use of IT in organizations requires top executives to act as business visionaries and provide
appropriate directions for IT-related initiatives. Top management support is important to articulate the need
for IT and communicate its functionality within the context of the organization's strategy, structure and
systems (Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993). This aspect of top management support is crucial when
organizations are part of the COS. Continuous support of this nature will enhance the success of IT resources
by making IT resources available, and supporting and guiding the IS functions for the good of the COS.
Continuous commitment of this nature also helps integrate IT with business strategies and processes, and
ensures continuity in IT investments over time (Ross et al., 1996; Powell and Dent-Micallef, 1997; Wade and
Hulland, 2004). The lack of such support may see IT resources having little effect on performance, even when
substantial investments are made to acquire or develop these resources (Wade and Hulland, 2004). This
situationwill also see underutilization of IT resourceswithin COS. Sustained topmanagement commitment to
IT-related initiatives is an important IT-related capability that will ensure the continuity of the COS.


Organizations require timely and quality information to identify and leverage emerging IT-related
opportunities. The suggested IT governance structures for COS will provide information to top managers
with immediate potential to become knowledge for the organization. The suggested governance
structures will channel this information to the top managers. Top managements' ability to create
knowledge will see continuous support for IT-related initiatives that has implications for the organization
and the COS. The common understanding established through a co-created IT steering committee will
galvanize management's commitment towards the COS. The commitment will see top management in all
participating organizations being more committed to the objectives of the COS.


Organizations require a coordinated effort in planning, organizing, controlling, and directing the
deployment of IT resources (Boynton and Zmud, 1987; Karimi et al., 2000). Top management of all
participating organizations plays a crucial role in promoting this coordination. Governance structures that
promote coordination between organizations at the strategic, tactical, and operational levels will acts as
important catalysts in sophisticating this ITmanagement role. These IT governance structureswill secure and
sustain top management support for various IT-related initiatives within their COS. We suggest that:


H1. Co-created IT steering and operational systems committees, and inter-organizational lateral
communication and performance management systems will positively influence the level of continued top
management commitment to IT-related initiatives within the COS.


5.3. IT governance structures in COS and sustainable shared organizational knowledge


Shared organizational knowledge is the shared understanding on the benefits of IT resources between the
Unit and IT managers. This is an important IT-related capability for an organization. This understanding
determines the strategic use of IT in an organization (Rockart, 1988; Henderson, 1990; Boynton et al., 1994; Ray
et al., 2005). The benefit of this IT-related capability can also expand to the COS. The shared IT-related knowledge
between IT and Unit managers within an organization, and between organizations in a COSwill bind the IT and
UnitManagers (Boynton et al., 1994). This shared knowledgewill determine howorganizations use IT resources
in support of their processes, and how the processes related to the activities of partners in the COS.


A major capacity of the COS would lie in their ability to exchange knowledge continually on how to
synchronize the business processes of the parties. The depth of this dynamic capacity will be contingent
upon the conjunction of IT and business-related knowledge possessed and exchanged amongst the IT and
Unit Managers (Ray et al., 2005). Sustainable shared organizational knowledge will enhance the
performance of specific processes within the COS, and increase the operational and service performance
coordination of the collaborative teams (Nelson and Cooprider, 1996). Sustainable, shared organizational
knowledge will contribute to IT assimilation within the COS. The result of this outcome will be an
enhanced level of IT-business alignment between the partners of a COS.


The discussed IT governance structures for COS will provide visibility and transparency of the IT
initiatives (Earl, 1989). The result of this outcome is a consensus on value of IT across the partners within a
COS. This environment will promote the understanding required to leverage the IT resources continually.
COS sophisticates organizations IT infrastructure because the IT resources must demonstrate value beyond






210 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

the adopted organization. The assimilative capability of different types of management is an essential
commodity in this environment (McFarlan, 1984; Raho et al., 1987). Unit managers play a critical role in
setting high-level architectures and act as advocates for effective IT governance (Weill and Ross, 2004). The
suggested governance structures of the COS suggest collaboration within an appropriate mix of business
and IT executives. This collaboration will ensure strategic alignment with the partners, a balanced portfolio
of IT investments, and close coordination of business and IT in the COS. The governance structures are the
ideal vehicle to ensure congruent vision of partners of the COS, including the IT and Unit managers. The
result of this congruent vision would be a common understanding of the benefits of IT to the alliance. The
learning from the resultant interaction within the alliance develops a sustainable capability of a unique
understanding between the users and managers of technology in the alliance. We suggest that:


H2. Co-created IT steering and operational systems committees, and inter-organizational lateral
communication and performance management systems will positively influence the level of sustained shared
organizational knowledge within the COS.


5.4. IT governance structures in COS and sustainable flexible IT infrastructure


IT infrastructures are the foundation for the establishment of the COS. IT infrastructure is a shared set of
capital resources that provide the foundation on which IT applications are built (Duncan, 1995).
Organizations form alliances to obtain or maintain competitive advantage. A flexible set of IT
infrastructures will mean that the partners in the alliance obtain opportunities continuously to leverage
their resources uniquely for competitive advantage. A flexible IT infrastructure facilitates rapid
development and implementation of IT applications for the COS. These IT applications will enable
organizations to respond swiftly to take advantage of emerging opportunities (Ray et al., 2005). The
shared and sustainable flexible IT infrastructure of the alliance would be its unique IT-related capability.
The path-dependence of the infrastructure means there can be significant differences across organizations
or alliances in the constitution of this infrastructure. The IT infrastructure differences are long-term
because infrastructure redevelopment is a time consuming and a costly process. Its ability to provide new
opportunities to the members will be contingent upon timely IT-related decisions that give life to the IT
infrastructure. This outcome is possible through the suggested IT governance structures.


The suggested co-created steering and operational systems committeewill blend the understanding of the
operational managers and the top executives. The inter-organizational performance and communication
systems will ensure that the IT-related decisions have prime value for the alliance. These structures would
lead to agility and leadership in exploiting and managing IT. This agility will result in dynamic resource
allocation and exploitation (Thomas, 1996). The result will be a structure, flexible and intelligent enough to
identify competitive opportunities, and capitalize on existing strengths (Thomas, 1996). Importantly, these IT
governance structures promote a shared vision that contributes dynamics to flexible IT infrastructure. The
parties in the alliance will be agile, and vision how current IT infrastructure could facilitate leveraging of
potential opportunities. The suggested IT governance structures will play an important role in sustaining a
flexible IT infrastructure through the alliances cooperative initiatives. We suggest that:


H3. Co-created IT steering and operational systems committees, and inter-organizational lateral
communication and performance management systems will positively influence the level of sustained flexible
IT infrastructure within the COS.


5.5. Sustainable IT-related capabilities and process-level performance


Relating IT governance structures of COS to sustainable IT-related capabilities renders an incomplete
assessment of the effectiveness of the IT governance structures. Organizations acquire IT resources to enhance
their core business processes (Davenport, 1990; Alter, 2003). This means that organizations efforts relating to
their IT-related capabilities that benefited from their IT governance initiatives must be visible in their business
processes. IT resources have a direct and immediate impact on the internal processes (Davenport, 1990; Alter,
2003). The sustainable IT-related capabilities will ensure the efficient and effective of the use of IT at this process
level.






211A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

Sustainable top management commitment will make IT resources available at the right time for the
benefit of the COS. This commitment will also support and guide the IS functions, and integrate IT with
business strategy, and processes (Powell and Dent-Micallef, 1997). These commitments enhance the
influence of the IT resources on business process performance of the COS (Ross et al., 1996; Powell and
Dent-Micallef, 1997). Uncoordinated efforts may bring ad hoc benefits, but not adequate to create and
manage competitive advantage. Sustainable top management commitment is an important IT-related
capability because it enhances IT resources ability to contribute to business process performance of the
collaborative alliance.


Shared organization knowledge between IT and Unit managers also contributes to process performance
(Nelson and Cooprider, 1996; Ray et al., 2005; Jeffers et al., 2008). Ray et al. (2005) found a positive
relationship between the shared knowledge and the customer service process. They noted that the level of
common knowledge and understanding between the IT and the line managers regarding the use of IT to
improve process performance is a critical factor in successful utilization of IT in the pursuit of business
objectives. Nelson and Cooprider (1996) found that an increasing level of shared knowledge between IS and
line groups are linked with increased operational and service performance of the IS groups. Jeffers et al.
(2008) found that the level of shared knowledge is an important ITmanagement related capability, in that it is
positively associated with third party logistics processes.


Flexible IT infrastructure is another capability that influences a firm's ability to use IT to manage their
business processes (Duncan, 1995; Armstrong and Sambamurthy, 1999; Ray et al., 2005). The flexibility of the
infrastructure makes cost, pace, and value of IT-enabled innovation different for different firms (Duncan, 1995;
Broadbent and Weill, 1997), Ray et al. (2005) found that the flexibility of IT infrastructure allows firms to
implement IT applications to support customer service more efficiently and effectively, and this explains
differences in performance of customer service. Flexible IT infrastructure allows firms to implement IT
applications to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in their internal processes and improving their performance.
We suggest that:


H4a. Sustainable top management commitment to IT initiatives in a collaborative alliance will positively
influence internal process-level performance of the alliance partners.


H4b. Sustainable organizational knowledge between IT and Unit managers in a collaborative alliance will
positively influence internal process-level performance of the alliance partners.


H4c. Sustainable flexible IT infrastructure in a collaborative alliance will positively influence internal
process-level performance of the alliance partners.


5.6. Internal process performance and improvement in customer service


Organizations' ability to manage their external processes is contingent upon the strength and agility of
their internal processes. Ensuring customer satisfaction is an important external activity for any organization.
The relationship between customer satisfaction and firm productivity is an important issue (Anderson et al.,
1997; Singh, 2000; Liao and Chuang, 2004). Organizations should pursue superiority in both customer
satisfaction and productivity. Organizations sustainable IT-related capabilities will promote automation of
internal processes, improve existing technology, and reallocate resources through changes in strategy,
processes, and organizational structure.


These efforts will refine internal processes and enhance firm productivity (Stigler, 1942; Anderson et al.,
1997). Frontline employees will benefit from these enhancements. Organizations engage in collaborative
alliances to manage two important stakeholders, the suppliers and the customers. The cohesive environment
that a COS provides will also help in managing any tension between satisfying the managements' and
customers' expectations simultaneously, a common source of employee stress (Singh, 2000). Advocates of
existence of trade-off between productivity and improved customer service suggest that appropriate
applications of IT improve both customer satisfaction and productivity simultaneously (Anderson and Fornell,
1994). We suggest that:


H5. Internal process-related performance will positively influence improvement in customer service.






212 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

5.7. Process performance and firm‐level performance


Engaging in collaborative alliance will mean additional investment in IT, thus consumption of financial
resources. This means the monetary return on the IT investment is always of a concern for the businesses.
IT resources have a direct influence on business processes performance and an indirect influence on the
firm-level performance (Dehning et al., 2007). This means that an organization's firm-level performance
depends on, amongst other factors, the effectiveness of the business processes in supporting the business
goals (DeLone and McLean, 2003). Improvements in effectiveness and efficiency of the business processes
will reflect on the firm-level performances of return on equity (ROE) and return on assets (ROA).
Organizations that can develop and sustain their IT-related capabilities with IT governance initiatives will
generate greater IT-relate benefits at the process level, and this will be reflected in their overall firm-level
measure of business health (Barua et al., 1995; Melville et al., 2004). We suggest that:


H6. Internal process performance will positively influence firm-level performance.


H7. Customer service improvement will positively influence firm-level performance.


6. Research design


We discussed earlier that an initial interpretive design helped us identify suitable IT governance
structures for COS. We do not repeat that deliberation here but rather we discuss the survey research
approach that we employed to collect data to validate our research model.


6.1. A survey research approach


This study uses a field survey to collect data to validate the proposed model. This field survey allows
data collection from a broad area and is the best way to reach the geographically dispersed contacts. This
approach was especially important in this study as COS are established to manage processes with partners
over disperse geographic locations.


6.2. Instrument development and test


Our interpretive approach supported the IT governance structures established in our model to manage the
IT resources in COS. Accordingly, the current study required development of new measures for these
constructs. Measures exist for sustainable IT-related capabilities and business value. Because prior research
used these measures in different contexts, revalidation of these existing measures was also necessary. This
study adopted the approach suggested by Davis (1989) and Moore and Benbasat (1991) to validate the
measures. The validation steps included item generation, item sorting and refinement, and a pilot test. Ten
fellow faculty colleagues with interest and expertise relating to this research participated in the item sorting
and refinement processes. The sorting inter-rater scores, the Cohen's Kappa (κ), indicated that the inter-rater
reliability for theparticipantswaswithin the full agreement range (κ=0.60–0.80) orwithin the almost perfect
agreement (κ=0.81–1.00). Twenty graduate students from an MBA course representing organizations that
engage in some form of IT-based collaboration participated in pilot test. Preliminary factor analysis of the pilot
test data using a component-based package indicated that the data exhibited normal measurement qualities.
Appendix 1 presents the final measurement items for the constructs in the research model.


6.3. Sampling frame and survey administration


We obtained company details, including their contact information, from the ORBIS database. ORBIS is a
publication of Bureau van Dijk Electronic Publishing (BvDEP). Our initial sample selection was non-random as
we targeted companies with potential collaborative opportunities. We then browsed the company websites,
and contacted them by phone and email for information on their IT-based collaboration. Seven hundred and
forty one target respondents (companies) from this database constituted the sampling frame of this study.
Dillman's (2007) methodologywas followed in developing and administrating the online research instrument.






213A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

Weapproached the contactswith the initial instrument package delivery and two reminders. At the conclusion
of the instrument administration process, we received 118 valid responses, a response rate of 15.90 percent.
This response rate is comparable to other studies involving senior executives (e.g., Jeffers et al., 2008). The
contacts that responded represented firms from the major industries (Banking, Finance, Hospitality, Tourism,
Travel, Media, Entertainment, Publishing, Retail, Wholesale, Distribution, Telecommunications, Transportation,
and Logistics). The respondents included the Director of Management Information Systems, and Chief
Information Officers, with good industry experience.

6.4. Diagnostics


We tested for the non-response bias with first and the last thirty responses for all measures and did not
find any significant differences on any of the variables. Examination of common methods variance using
Harman's single-factor test, where all the items were subject to exploratory factor analysis (EFA), revealed
common methods variance was not an issue. More than one factor emerged from un-rotated factor
solutions, and more than one factor explained the majority of the variance. A small number of responses
contained missing data, and Little's MCAR test yielded data to be missing completely at random (p=
0.441). Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), implemented by the EM (expectation maximization)
algorithm in the SPSS Missing Values option imputed the missing data.

Table 3
Factor loadings and cross loadings.


COSC CTSC CUST FRMP ILCS IOPS PROP SFLX SSOK STMC


COSC1 0.828 0.417 0.467 0.499 0.126 0.474 0.477 0.348 0.548 0.562
COSC2 0.765 0.494 0.714 0.340 0.054 0.363 0.332 0.286 0.179 0.240
COSC3 0.818 0.417 0.371 0.394 0.085 0.424 0.413 0.324 0.269 0.298
CTSC1 0.360 0.885 0.452 0.429 0.120 0.439 0.403 0.368 0.297 0.339
CTSC2 0.365 0.894 0.314 0.340 0.054 0.363 0.332 0.286 0.179 0.240
CTSC3 0.418 0.917 0.671 0.394 0.085 0.424 0.413 0.324 0.269 0.298
CUST1 0.413 0.465 0.907 0.429 0.090 0.498 0.508 0.420 0.316 0.385
CUST2 0.541 0.423 0.847 0.329 0.196 0.364 0.385 0.309 0.278 0.290
CUST3 0.499 0.470 0.851 0.401 0.118 0.411 0.356 0.275 0.291 0.351
FRMP1 0.407 0.389 0.423 0.972 0.224 0.493 0.566 0.324 0.381 0.436
FRMP2 0.489 0.399 0.437 0.951 0.233 0.769 0.591 0.350 0.373 0.421
FRMP3 0.667 0.460 0.413 0.920 0.227 0.785 0.505 0.348 0.316 0.383
ILCS1 0.127 0.093 0.102 0.270 0.819 0.190 0.079 0.225 0.097 0.109
ILCS2 0.081 0.039 0.103 0.169 0.837 0.139 0.113 0.276 0.112 0.117
ILCS3 0.098 0.129 0.174 0.168 0.848 0.102 0.049 0.211 0.080 0.125
IOPS1 0.428 0.417 0.467 0.399 0.126 0.974 0.677 0.348 0.548 0.562
IOPS2 0.321 0.448 0.431 0.333 0.250 0.793 0.519 0.349 0.362 0.402
IOPS3 0.328 0.417 0.467 0.499 0.126 0.974 0.677 0.348 0.548 0.562
PROP1 0.594 0.391 0.353 0.513 0.016 0.615 0.815 0.333 0.555 0.549
PROP2 0.505 0.337 0.401 0.497 0.097 0.546 0.890 0.549 0.534 0.586
PROP3 0.575 0.390 0.495 0.510 0.133 0.616 0.883 0.523 0.618 0.663
SFLX1 0.341 0.297 0.366 0.386 0.274 0.363 0.494 0.904 0.360 0.479
SFLX2 0.294 0.237 0.245 0.235 0.190 0.292 0.444 0.780 0.409 0.449
SFLX3 0.393 0.400 0.381 0.287 0.265 0.306 0.465 0.869 0.333 0.368
SSOK1 0.325 0.184 0.224 0.220 0.046 0.378 0.554 0.292 0.860 0.763
SSOK2 0.434 0.235 0.299 0.380 0.143 0.526 0.523 0.347 0.895 0.619
SSOK3 0.446 0.300 0.342 0.357 0.106 0.468 0.614 0.446 0.814 0.515
STMC1 0.428 0.330 0.368 0.383 0.176 0.445 0.593 0.493 0.592 0.770
STMC2 0.367 0.210 0.260 0.296 0.045 0.418 0.617 0.379 0.568 0.863
STMC3 0.472 0.285 0.358 0.407 0.126 0.533 0.525 0.383 0.566 0.857


CTSC — Co-Created IT Steering Committee, ILCS — Inter-organizational Lateral Communication Systems, IOPS — Inter-Organizational
Performance Systems, COSC — Co-Created Operational Systems Committee, SSOK, Sustained Shared Organizational Knowledge, SFLX —
Sustained Flexible IT Infrastructure, STMC — Sustained Top Management Commitment, CUST — Customer Service, PROP — Internal
Process-Level Performance, FRMP — Firm-Level Performance.






214 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

7. Results


7.1. A components-based approach to model testing


We used partial least squares (PLS), a components-based structural equation modeling (SEM) program
to test the theoretical relationships amongst latent variables (structural path) and the relationship
between latent variables and its indicators (measurement paths). PLS is suitable for application and
prediction (Chin et al., 2003). PLS assumes that all the measured variance is useful variance, and estimates
the latent variables as exact linear combinations of the observed measures, avoiding the indeterminacy
problem and providing an exact definition of component scores (Chin et al., 2003).

7.2. Measurement model


Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) showed the factor loadings for constructs load highly only on their
designated constructs. Measurement items have a factor loading mostly above the rule of thumb of a
loading of 0.70, indicating at least 50% of the variance in the manifest variable is accounted for by the
construct (Hair et al., 2008). Cross-loadings analysis revealed the manifest variables load highly only on
the desired latent variable. There are high cross loadings between PROP and IOPS, SSOK, STMC and FRMP.
Table 3 presents factor loading and cross loadings.


Table 4 presents the results of measurement model assessment, including Cronbach's alpha, average
variance extracted, composite readability, and inter-construct correlations. The alpha coefficients of all
constructs was higher than 0.70 (Nunnally, 1978). Themore accurate composite reliabilities, which avoid the
assumption of equal weightings, were above 0.80. The average variance extracted were all above
the acceptable 0.50 level (Chin, 1988). The square root of average variance extracted, which represents
the average association of each construct to its measures, was higher than the correlations with the
other constructs. This statistics indicates that the construct closely relate to its own measures rather than to
those of other constructs. Table 4 shows the square root of average variance extracted diagonally in bold.

7.3. Structural model


This study considers the suggested IT governance structures in totality. That is, this study presents the
culmination of the individual structures as a higher order factor. This approach is consistentwith the objective
of this study of suggesting a set of governance structures for collaborative alliances. This approach also
reduces the number of path coefficients in the structural model, thus improving the validity of the findings.
The results of the analysis of the higher order IT governance factor indicates all IT governance factors favorably

Table 4
Measurement properties.


AVE CRA COR COSC CTSC UST FRMP ILCS IOPS1 PROP SFLX SSOK STMC


COSC 0.646 0.757 0.845 0.804
CTSC 0.808 0.882 0.926 0.626 0.899
CUST 0.755 0.839 0.902 0.519 0.595 0.869
FRMP 0.898 0.943 0.964 0.453 0.437 0.448 0.948
ILCS 0.697 0.784 0.874 0.121 0.100 0.149 0.241 0.835
IOPS 0.842 0.903 0.941 0.634 0.460 0.494 0.624 0.173 0.917
PROP 0.745 0.829 0.897 0.445 0.431 0.486 0.586 0.099 0.686 0.863
SFLX 0.727 0.811 0.888 0.404 0.368 0.392 0.359 0.288 0.377 0.548 0.853
SSOK 0.734 0.819 0.892 0.473 0.284 0.341 0.377 0.117 0.538 0.660 0.427 0.857
STMC 0.691 0.774 0.870 0.509 0.332 0.397 0.437 0.140 0.561 0.697 0.505 0.694 0.831


CTSC — Co-Created IT Steering Committee, ILCS — Inter-organizational Lateral Communication Systems, IOPS — Inter-Organizational
Performance Systems, COSC — Co-Created Operational Systems Committee, SSOK, Sustained Shared Organizational Knowledge, SFLX —
Sustained Flexible IT Infrastructure, STMC — Sustained Top Management Commitment, CUST — Customer Service, PROP — Internal
Process-Level Performance, FRMP — Firm-Level Performance, AVE — Average Variance Extracted, CRA — Cronbach's Alpha, COR —
Composite Reliability.






Fig. 4. Structural model.


215A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

and significantly contribute to this higher order factor. The significant path coefficients range from 0.098
(2.824) (ILCS) to 0.524 (4.953) (CTSC). The four structures share 97.8% variance with the higher order factor.


The higher order IT governance factor significantly and favorably influences the three sustainable IT-related
capabilities. This higher-level governance structure explains 26.3% variance in STMC (pc=0.513***), 21.6%
variance in SSOK (pc=0.465***), and 20.8% variance in SFLEX (pc=0.456***). These outcomes support H1-H3.
The three sustainable IT-related capabilities favorably and significantly relate to internal process-level
performance. They explain 54.9% variance in the internal process-level performance with strong associations,
STMC (pc=0.365**), SSOK (p=0.221*), and SFLX (0.269**). These outcomes support H4-H6.


The internal process-level performance favorably and significantly impact customer service improvement
(pc=0.486***), and it explains 23.7% variance in the customer service improvement. This outcome supports
H7. The internal process-level performance and customer service improvement also favorably and
significantly impact firm-level performance. Together, they explain 37.8% variance in firm-level performance,
and they have strong associations with PROP (pc=0.482***), and CUST (pc=0.214**). These outcomes
support H8-H9. Overall, the analysis reveals a strong fit of the data to the suggested IT governance model for
collaborative alliances. Fig. 4 presents the outcome of all the above associations between the IT governance
structures, the sustainable IT-related capabilities, and business value.


8. Discussion


The emergence of web 2.0 tools presents organizations with opportunities to engage in various forms of
collaborative alliances (McAfee, 2009). These alliances present new challenges to organizations in managing
their IT resources. This situation arises because organizations now have to consider the ramifications of their
IT-related decisions in a wider collaborative jurisdiction. Organizations require new forms of arrangements
to mange and make decisions relating to their IT. This study suggested a dynamic capabilities framework as
the basis for possible IT governance structures for the COS. This suggestion is based on the premise that
across-organization IT use requires across-organization collaborative governance mechanisms at various
levels of the organizational hierarchy (Dyer and Singh, 1998).


An interpretive design informed us of the various IT governance structures required to manage and
leverage the IT resources within the COS. Interviews with contacts from organizations that actively engage
in collaborative alliances revealed the need for co-created IT governance structures. Importantly,
organizations require these co-created IT governance structures within various levels of the organizational
hierarchy. These IT governance structures need to focus on decision making, mostly at the strategic level,
collaboration and communication on ways leverage the IT resources, and across-organization performance
evaluation systems. These IT governance structures present an embracive approach to managing IT
resources within collaborative alliances. This effort of identifying suitable IT governance structures for



image of Fig.�4




216 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

collaborative alliances is an important one because the proliferation of collaborative tools will see
organizations continue to engage in various forms of collaborative alliance to obtain or sustain their
performance in the current global economy(Turban and Volonino, 2011).


Organizations must also be able to understand ways to evaluate their IT governance efforts. This
understanding is important because it determines the effectiveness of the adopted IT governance structures
tomanage and leverage the IT resources. Unchecked governance approachesmay result in ineffective use of IT
resources within organizations. This study recognizes the dynamic proliferation of IT resources, in that
organizations continually have access to new and capable IT resources. Organizations' ability to leverage such
dynamic resources is contingent upon their ability to renew their IT-related competences to understand and
recognize the opportunities offered by the modern IT resources (Teece, 2007). Respectively, this study
proposed and evaluated the effectiveness of the IT governance structures for collaborative alliance against
organizations ability to sustain their IT-related capabilities.


The results showed that for COS, their IT governance efforts relate to their ability to sustain their
IT-related capabilities. That is, organizations' IT governance structures set the platform for organizations to
understand and use the newly acquired IT resources effectively. This outcome is important for the COS
because these organizations' ability to maintain their competitive position with collaborative alliances will
be contingent upon their ability to make innovative use of shared IT resources to refine their
across-organization business processes. This study considered IT-related capabilities of top management
commitment towards IT initiatives, shared organizational knowledge between IT and non-ITmanagers, and
a flexible IT infrastructure. These IT-related capabilities are essential to form and sustainably leverage the
COS (Ray et al., 2005).


Ultimately, organizations' IT-related abilities and capabilities must contribute to business value
(Ravichandran et al., 2009). This study considered the influence of the sustainable IT-related capabilities
on measures of business value at the business process and the firm levels. IT governance structures do not
directly affect business value. They rather influence the business value through creating and sustaining the
IT-related capabilities. The suggested model, however, allows one to infer whether organizations' IT
governance structures indirectly contribute to their business value. The results suggest that organizations'
sustainable IT-related capabilities (STMC, SSOK, and SFLX) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
their internal business processes. This outcome indicates organizations that are part of COS are able to
leverage the IT resources to improve the conduct of their processes. The results also suggest that
organizations' improved internal business processes forms the basis for improving their customer service.
This aspect is important in today's business environment because organizations value adding capabilities
is a major indicator of customer service improvement (Turban and Volonino, 2011). Sustainable IT-related
capabilities' competitive advantage is contingent upon innovative ways of locking in the customers and
increasing their switching costs. The final stage of the model suggests that organizations improved
internal and external business processes will contribute to their firm-level performance.


Overall, this study presents a comprehensive approach of developing and evaluating the IT governance
structures for collaborative alliances. Themodel permitsmaking inferences on the effect of the IT governance
structures on measures of business value. This understanding is important because stakeholders ultimately
evaluate the financial ramifications of their decisions. This impact, however, is contingent upon organizations
understanding and their ability to leverage the IT resources at the intermediate business processes level.

9. Contributions, directions for future research, limitations and conclusions


Prior research notes much on the potential of COSs, but understanding on the nature and effectiveness
of their IT governance structures is relatively sparse. An important contribution of this research is the
identification of the IT governance structures for the collaborative alliances, and a sustainable IT-related
capabilities approach to assessing the effectiveness of these governance structures. The dynamic
capabilities framework is an ideal basis for suggesting co-created governance structures and the need for
organizations to possess sustainable IT-related capabilities. Understanding the relationship between these
factors is an approach to evaluating the effectiveness of the IT governance structures for collaborative
alliances. Future research can capitalize on these approaches to investigate new IT governance structures
for COS. There is also potential for deepening our understanding on measuring the effectiveness of the IT






217A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

governance structures for COS. Future research can consider targeted measures of internal and external
business processes, and firm‐level outcomes.


For practice, this study demonstrates the need for inter-organizational coordination in governing
the IT resources within COS. It offers possible forms of governance structures that involve different
levels of management. The study suggests some sustainable IT-related capabilities that organizations may
possess to leverage their IT resources. Importantly, it informs practice on understanding the relationship
between the IT governance structures and sustainable IT-related capabilities as a basis for evaluating the
effectiveness of the IT governance structures. There is also a need to link these sustainable IT-related
capabilities to measures of business value. This linkage accords practice to make inferences on the
business value implications of their IT management efforts. The result is a holistic approach to developing
IT governance capacities, and ways to measure the effectiveness of these capacities.


A response rate of 15.90% is at the lower end of acceptable response rate. We, however, did manage to
solicit responses from 118 contacts, and detailed diagnostics of the data did not reveal any issues on data
quality and population representation. The data was also adequate to assess the structural properties of the
suggested researchmodel. This study uses a cross-sectional research design,which allows for assessment of
important relationships between IT governance structures, sustainable IT-related capabilities, internal
process-level performance, improvement in customer service, and firm-level performance in organizations
that are part of COS. This approach does not address the question of causality. Despite the strong internal
validity procedures in instrument development, testing, and administration, the sustainability of this
study's findings is limited. A longitudinal study strengthens the causality and sustainability aspects of a
research.


This study proposes four IT governance structures for collaborative alliances. Organizations size,
experience level, and the representation of business units can also conceivably influence the effectiveness
of these IT Governance structures. While other variables may capture the effect of these attributes, their
exclusion may present some bias in the results. Future research can include these factors in this study's
suggested model. We measure the effectiveness of the suggested IT governance structures for COS against
the within-firm IT-related capabilities. It is possible that the suggested IT governance structures develop
inter-firm IT-related capabilities, which then sustain alliances' within-firm IT-related capabilities. Future
research could consider such inter-firm IT-related capabilities, and how they relate to within-firm
IT-related capabilities. Our survey dataset allowed us to evaluate the total (higher level) effectiveness
of the IT governance structures on the collaborative alliances' ability to sustain their IT-related
capabilities. This means that this study does not evaluate the association between the individual IT
governance structures and sustainable IT-related capabilities. Future research could consider this.
While this study makes every conceivable effort in validating the research instrument, potential
demand bias may exist in responding to measurement. Future research, perhaps by adopting
alternative methodologies, could obtain information regarding size and composition of the IT
structures, the times they meet during a given period, for a better understanding of the effectiveness
of the suggested IT governance structures.


To conclude, this study offers insights on the need for co-created IT governance structures to manage
the IT resources with COS. The proliferation of rich web 2.0 tools means organizations will increase their
intensity of commitment into COS. This requires more effort in advancing this body of knowledge. Future
research can add much to this knowledge by suggesting other IT governance structures, sustainable
IT-related capabilities, and contingent factors to strengthen our understanding of the mechanics of
effective IT governance for COS. We envisage our effort will encourage other researchers to add to this
body of knowledge to ensure organizations are continually updated on ways to leverage their investment
in the IT resources in a changing and turbulent business environment.

Acknowledgements


The authors thank Kevin Kobelsky and Jerry Gaertner for their valuable comments and suggestions,
as discussants of an earlier version of this paper presented at the 7th biennial University of Waterloo
symposium on information integrity and information systems assurance (held on October 20–21,
2011).






218 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

Appendix 1. Final Measurement Items


All items measured on a 7 point Likert scale (No basis for answering [0], Strongly Disagree [1], Disagree [2], Slightly Disagree [3],


Neutral [4], Slightly Agree [5], Agree [6], Strongly Agree [7]).


Co-created IT steering committee
Our top management is part of an inter-organizational IT steering committee that makes IT-related resource allocation decisions
relating to system development and recruitment, and training within our collaborative alliance.


Our top management is part of an inter-organizational IT steering committee that improves visibility of IT and revamps the IT
practices within our collaborative alliance.


Our top management is part of an inter-organizational IT steering committee that helps facilitate the IT coordinating
requirements and practices within our collaborative alliance.


Inter-organizational lateral communication systems
Our management continually communicate with their peers within our collaborative alliance.
Our management continually use the Web 2.0 tools to collaborate with partners in our collaborative alliance.
Our management continually communicate with their peers to strengthen partner relationship in our collaborative alliance.


Inter-organizational performance systems
Our organization uses broader metrics that consider factors outside our organization to evaluate our performance in relation to
our collaborative alliance.


Our organization uses metrics that consider factors outside our organization to evaluate operational alignment in relation to our
collaborative alliance.


Our organization uses metrics that consider factors outside our organization to evaluate operational consistency in relation to
our collaborative alliance.


Co-created operational systems committee
Our operational and tactical managers are part of inter-organizational committee that makes decisions relating to alignment of
processes.


Our operational and tactical managers are part of inter-organizational committee that discuss operational efficiencies of
inter-organizational processes


Our operational and tactical managers are part of inter-organizational committee that set directions for process coordination
between our collaborative alliances.


Sustainable top management commitment
Our top executives have clearly indicated their commitment to IT over the last five years.
Our top executives have championed IT within the organization over the last five years.
Our top executives have been at the forefront of IT adoption in our organization over the last five years


Sustainable shared organizational knowledge
Our IT management team is continually very well informed about the business operations and strategies of each unit.
Each unit's management team continually recognize IT as a competitive weapon.
Each unit's management team continually recognize IT as a tool to increase productivity of clerical and professional employees.


Sustainable flexible IT infrastructure
Our organization continues to refine and establish corporate rules and standards for hardware and operating systems to ensure
platform compatibility over the last five years.


Our organization continues to have a high percentage of standardized corporate data and can access all data pertinent to a
customer through a single interface.


Our organization continues to have a high percentage of corporate data that is currently sharable across systems and business units.


Customer service improvement
The customer service unit gives customers prompt service.
Customer service representatives are never too busy to respond to customers.
Customer service representatives are empowered to solve customers' problems.


Internal process-level performance
Our selling cost per employee has reduced significantly compared to our competitors.
Our labor cost has reduced significantly compared to our competitors.
Our operating expenditure has reduced significantly compared to our competitors.


Firm-level performance
Our return on investment has been outstanding compared to our competitors.
The increase in our total revenue has exceeded our leading competitors.
Our return on equity has been outstanding compared to our competitors.






219A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

References


Alter S. 18 reasons why IT-reliant work systems should replace ‘the IT artifact’ as the core subject matter of the is field. Commun AIS
2003;12:365–94.


Anderson E, Fornell C. Customer satisfaction, market share, and profitability: findings from Sweden. J Mark 1994;58:53–66.
Anderson EW, Fornell C, Rust RT. Customer satisfaction, productivity, and profitability: differences between goods and services. Mark


Sci 1997;16(2):129–45.
Armstrong CP, Sambamurthy V. Information technology assimilation in firms: the influence of senior leadership and IT


infrastructures. Inf Syst Res 1999;10(4):304–31.
Barney JB. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J Manage 1991;17(1):99-120.
Barua A, Kriebel CH, Mukhopadhyay T. Information technologies and business value: an analytic and empirical investigation. Inf Syst


Res 1995;6(1):3-23.
Bowen PL, Chung MD, Rohde FH. Enhancing IT governance practices: a model and case study of an organisation's efforts. Int J Account


Inf Syst 2007;8:191–221.
Boynton AC, Zmud RW. Information technology planning in the 1990's: directions for practice and research. MIS Q 1987;11(1):59–71.
Boynton AC, Zmud RW, Jacobs GD. The influence of IT management practice on IT use in large corporations. MIS Q 1994;18(3):


299–334.
Broadbent M, Weill P. Management by maxim: how business and IT managers can create IT infrastructures. Sloan Manage Rev


1997;38(3):77–92.
Byrd TA. Technology, core competencies, and sustained competitive advantage. Inf Resour Manage J 2001;14:41–52.
Chin W. The partial least squares approach for structural equation modeling. In: Marcoulides GA, editor. Modern methods for


business research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988. p. 295–336.
Chin WW, Marcolin BL, Newsted PR. A partial least squares latent variable modeling approach for measuring interaction effects:


results from a Monte Carlo simulation study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption study. Inf Syst Res 2003;14:189–217.
Coase R. The nature of the firm. Economica 1937;4:386–405.
COSO Guidance on Monitoring Internal Control Systems. www.coso.org2009. accessed 1 February 2011.
Davenport T. The new industrial engineering: IT and business process redesign. Sloan Manage Rev 1990;31(4):11–27.
Davis FD. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and user acceptance of information technology. MIS Q 1989;13:319–40.
de Rond M. Startegic alliances as social facts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2003.
Dehning B, Richardson VJ, Zmud RW. The financial performance effects of IT-based supply chain management systems in


manufacturing firms. J Oper Manag 2007;25:806–24.
DeLone WD, McLean ER. The Delone and Mclean model of information systems success: a ten-year update. J Manag Inf Syst


2003;19(4):9-30.
Dey I. Qualitative data analysis: a user-friendly guide for social scientists. London: Routledge; 1993.
Dillman DA. Mail and Internet surveys: the tailored design method. NY: John Wiley & Sons; 2007.
Duncan NB. Capturing flexibility of information technology infrastructure: a study of resource characteristics and their measure.


J Manag Inf Syst 1995;12(2):37. [21].
Dyer J, Singh H. The relational view: cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive strategy. Acad Manage Rev


1998;23:660–79.
Earl MJ. Management strategies for information technology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; 1989.
Feeny DF, Willcocks LP. Core is capabilities for exploiting information technology. Sloan Manage Rev 1998;39(3):9.
Grant RM. Contemporary strategy analysis. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing; 2008.
Hair J, Anderson R, Tatham R, Black W. Multivariate data analysis. Prentice Hall; 2008.
Henderson JC. Plugging into strategic partnerships: the critical is connection. Sloan Manage Rev 1990;31(3):7.
Henderson J, Venkatraman N. Strategic alignment: leveraging information technology for transforming organizations. IBM Syst J


1993;32(1):472–84.
International Organisation for Standardization Corporate Governance of Information Technology. www.iso.org2008. accessed 1


February 2011.
IT Governance Institute. It governance status report; 2007.
Jeffers PI, Muhamma WA, Nault BR. Information technology and process performance: an empirical investigation of the interaction


between it and non-it resources. Decis Sci 2008;39(4):703–35.
Kane GC, Fichman RG. The shoemaker's children: using wikis for information systems teaching, research, and publication (includes


comments and editorial note). MIS Q 2009;33(1):1-22.
Karimi J, Bhattacherjee A, Gupta YP, Somers TM. The effects of MIS steering committees on information technology management


sophistication. J Manag Inf Syst 2000;17(2):207–34.
Langfield-Smith K. The relations between transactional characteristics, trust and risk in the start-up phase of a collaborative alliance.


Manag Account Res 2008;19(4):344–64.
Liao H, Chuang A. A multilevel investigation of factors influencing employee service performance and customer outcomes. Acad


Manage J 2004;47(1):41–58.
Mata FJ, Fuerst WL, Barney JB. Information technology and sustained competitive advantage: a resource-based analysis. MIS Q


1995;19(4):487–505.
Mayer KJ, Teece DJ. Unpacking strategic alliances: the structure and purpose of alliance versus supplier relationships. J Econ Behav


Organ 2008;66(1):106–27.
McAfee A. Enterprise 2.0: new collaborative tools for your organization's toughest challenges. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard


Business Review; 2009.
McFarlan FW. Information technology changes the way you compete. Harv Bus Rev 1984;62:98-103.
Melville N, Kraemer K, Gurbaxani V. Information technology and organizational performance: an integrative model of IT business


value. MIS Q 2004;28(2):283–321.
Moore GC, Benbasat I. Development of an instrument to measure the perceptions of adopting an information technology innovation.


Inf Syst Res 1991;2:192–222.



http://www.coso.org

http://www.iso.org




220 A. Prasad et al. / International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 13 (2012) 199–220

Nelson KM, Cooprider JG. The contribution of shared knowledge to is group performance. MIS Q 1996;20(4):409.
Nunnally JC. Psychometric theory. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 1978.
Powell TC, Dent-Micallef A. Information technology as competitive advantage: the role of human, business, and technology


resources. Strateg Manag J 1997;18(5):375–405.
Prasad A, Heales J, Green P. A capabilities-based approach to obtaining a deeper understanding of information technology


governance effectiveness: evidence from IT steering committees. Int J Account Inf Syst 2010;11(3):214–32.
Raho LE, Belohlav JA, Fiedler KD. Assimilating new technology into the organization: an assessment of Mcfarlan and Mckenney's


model. MIS Q 1987;11(1):46–63.
Ravichandran T, Liu Y, Han S, Hasan I. Diversification and firm performance: exploring the moderating effects of information


technology spending. J Manag Inf Syst 2009;25(4):205–40.
Ray G, Muhamma WA, Barney JB. Information technology and the performance of customer service process: a resource-based


analysis. MIS Q 2005;29(4):625–53.
Rockart JF. The line takes the leadership — is management in the wired society. Sloan Manage Rev 1988;29:57–64.
Ross JW, Beath CM, Goodhue DL. Develop long-term competitiveness through IT assets. Sloan Manage Rev 1996;38(1):31–65.
Sambamurthy V, Zmud RW. Arrangements for information technology governance: a theory of multiple contingencies. MIS Q


1999;23(2):261–90.
Santhanam R, Hartono E. Issues in linking information technology capability to firm performance. MIS Q 2003;27(1):125–53.
Singh J. Performance productivity and quality of frontline employees in service organisations. J Mark 2000;64:15–34.
Stigler GJ. The theory of price. New York: Random House; 1942.
Teece D. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strateg Manage


J 2007;28:1319–50.
Teece DJ, Pisano G, Shuen A. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strateg Manage J 1997;18:509–33.
Thomas LG. The two faces of competition: dynamic resourcefulness and the hypercompetitve shift. Organ Sci 1996;7:221–42.
Turban E, Volonino L. Information technology for management. Wiley; 2011.
Wade M, Gravill J. Diversification and performance of Japanese IT subsidiaries: a resource-based view. Inf Manage 2003;40:305–16.
Wade M, Hulland J. Review: the resource-based view and information systems research: review, extension, and suggestions for


future research. MIS Q 2004;28(1):107–42.
Walsham G. The emergence of interpretivism in is research. Inf Syst Res 1995;6(4):376–94.
Weber K, Chathoth PK. Strategic alliances. Handbook of hospitality marketing management. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2008.


p. 501–23.
Weill P, Ross JW. IT governance: how top performers manage IT decision rights for superior results. Boston, MA: Harvard Business


School Press; 2004.
Yin RK. Case study research: design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1994.




