









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


International Journal of Information Management


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt


A supervised machine learning approach to data-driven simulation of
resilient supplier selection in digital manufacturing


Ian M. Cavalcantea, Enzo M. Frazzonb, Fernando A. Forcellinia, Dmitry Ivanovc,⁎


aMechanical Engineering Department, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil
b Production and Systems Engineering Department, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil
c Supply Chain Management, Berlin School of Economics and Law, Berlin, Germany


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Supplier selection
Machine learning
Simulation
Digital supply chain
Data-driven decision-making support
Resilience
Digital supply chain twin


A B S T R A C T


There has been an increased interest in resilient supplier selection in recent years, much of it focusing on
forecasting the disruption probabilities. We conceptualize an entirely different approach to analyzing the risk
profiles of supplier performance under uncertainty by utilizing the data analytics capabilities in digital manu-
facturing. Digital manufacturing peculiarly challenge the supplier selection by the dynamic order allocations,
and opens new opportunities to exploit the digital data to improve sourcing decisions. We develop a hybrid
technique, combining simulation and machine learning and examine its applications to data-driven decision-
making support in resilient supplier selection. We consider on-time delivery as an indicator for supplier relia-
bility, and explore the conditions surrounding the formation of resilient supply performance profiles. We the-
orize the notions of risk profile of supplier performance and resilient supply chain performance. We show that
the associations of the deviations from the resilient supply chain performance profile with the risk profiles of
supplier performance can be efficiently deciphered by our approach. The results suggest that a combination of
supervised machine learning and simulation, if utilized properly, improves the delivery reliability. Our approach
can also be of value when analyzing the supplier base and uncovering the critical suppliers, or combinations of
suppliers the disruption of which result in the adverse performance decreases. The results of this study advance
our understanding about how and when machine learning and simulation can be combined to create digital
supply chain twins, and through these twins improve resilience. The proposed data-driven decision-making
model for resilient supplier selection can be further exploited for design of risk mitigation strategies in supply
chain disruption management models, re-designing the supplier base or investing in most important and risky
suppliers.


1. Introduction


Companies whose suppliers are prone to disruption risks have a
common question to ask. How do firms obtain better performance than
others if similar suppliers are affected by disruptions? Recent research
hypothesized that some of that success is attributable to the resilient
supplier selection and development (Gao, Simchi-Levi, Teo, & Yan,
2018; Hosseini & Barker, 2016; Hosseini et al., 2019b; Kull & Talluri,
2008; Narasimhan & Talluri, 2009; Sawik, 2013a; Torabi, Baghersad, &
Mansouri, 2015; Yoon, Talluri, Yildiz, & Ho, 2018). Manufacturing
firms operate in environments with inherent uncertainties in demand,
supply, cost, lead time (LT) and catastrophic disasters (Ivanov, Dolgui,
& Sokolov, 2019; Papadopoulos et al., 2017; Rajagopal, Venkatesan, &
Goh, 2017). The increase in data availability and the emergence of new
digital technologies, such as machine learning, cloud computing,


internet of things (IoT) and blockchain enable managers and govern-
ment to cope with uncertainties using intelligent decision-making
principles (Dubey, Gunasekaran, & Childe, 2015; Grant & Yeo, 2018;
Gunasekaran, Kumar Tiwari, Dubey, & Fosso Wamba, 2016; Ismagilova,
Hughes, Dwivedi, & Raman, 2019; Kshetri, 2018; Kumar, Mangla,
Luthra, Rana, & Dwivedi, 2018; Liu, Chan, Yang, & Niu, 2018; Rana
et al., 2018). The Big Data phenomenon forced the development of new
techniques in fast analytics and data science as part of business in-
telligence using firms’ dynamic capabilities (Akter et al., 2019; Duan,
Edwards, & Dwivedi, 2019; Larson & Chang, 2016; Wamba et al.,
2017). Altay, Gunasekaran, Dubey, and Childe (2018) point out supply
chain agility and supply chain resilience are dynamic capabilities that
have significant effect on supply chain performance.


Digital manufacturing peculiarly challenge the supplier selection by
the dynamic order allocations, and opens new opportunities to exploit


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.004
Received 2 February 2019; Received in revised form 11 March 2019; Accepted 11 March 2019


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: dmitry.ivanov@hwr-berlin.de (D. Ivanov).


International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


Available online 28 March 2019
0268-4012/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/02684012

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.004

mailto:dmitry.ivanov@hwr-berlin.de

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.004

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.004&domain=pdf




the digital data to improve sourcing decisions. Gandomi and Haider
(2015) believe the current hype can be attributed to leading technology
companies, such as IBM, who invested in building a niche analytics
market. Techniques involving supervised machine learning (SML) have
already become powerful tools with various applications within in-
telligent manufacturing systems (Jordan & Mitchell, 2015; Wuest,
Weimer, Irgens, & Thoben, 2016). In this study, SML is further in-
vestigated regards to its application to supplier selection in digital
manufacturing with consideration of resilience.


Supplier selection is a critical issue for maintaining competitive
advantage in supply chain (SC) management (Dey, Bhattacharya, Ho, &
Clegg, 2015; Dickson, 1966; Weber & Current, 1993; Wetzstein,
Hartmann, Benton, & Hohenstein, 2016). Multi-factor supplier selection
has been recently extended by inclusion of disruption risks to address
SC resilience (Ang, Iancu, & Swinney, 2016; Das, Narasimhan, &
Talluri, 2006; Gao et al., 2018; He, Alavifard, Ivanov, & Jahani, 2018;
Hosseini & Barker, 2016; Ivanov, Dolgui, Sokolov, & Ivanova, 2017;
Tomlin, 2006; Wu & Olson, 2008; Yoon et al., 2018). Achieving SC
resilience involves adopting reactive and proactive approaches by
creating certain protections and taking into account possible pertur-
bations through contingency plans or backup supply planning (Elluru,
Gupta, Kaur, & Singh, 2017; Hosseini et al., 2019a). Digital technolo-
gies do not only enable data-driven decision support tools (Frazzon,
Kück, & Freitag, 2018), but also stimulate the development of new
production forms, such as smart manufacturing and Industry 4.0
(Ivanov et al., 2019; Kumar, Singh, & Lamba, 2018; Kusiak, 2018; Liao,
Deschamps, Loures, & Ramos, 2017; Rossit, Tohmé, & Frutos, 2018).
These new forms of digital manufacturing are characterized by higher
flexibility, make-to-order environments and customer-driven SC dy-
namic structuring, which requires dynamic supplier selection analysis.
At the same time, digital manufacturing is expected to face increased
disruption risks due to increasing complexity and globalization (Ivanov
et al., 2019). As such, there is also a need for new modeling approaches
with which to analyze resilient supplier selection in novel organiza-
tional networks (Durugbo, Tiwari, & Alcock, 2013) and Big Data can be
essential in supplier risk management as it can give detailed under-
standing of supplier performance towards the identification of oppor-
tunities for better sourcing (Lamba & Singh, 2017).


Despite the considerable progress in resilient supplier selection and
data-driven decision support systems in SCs, we are not aware of any
published research that considers data-driven approaches to supplier
selection with consideration of resilience in a digital manufacturing
environment. Since digital data is considered a key source for both new
manufacturing forms and decision-support systems (Chae, 2019), the
objective of this study is to close the research gap described above and,
by means of a test case, advance knowledge of how SML can contribute
to supplier selection in the context of digitalization and SC resilience.
Supplier selection involves consideration of both recurrent and dis-
ruption events, i.e., frequent events with low impact and rare events
with high impact, respectively (Dolgui, Ivanov, & Sokolov, 2018;
Ivanov, 2018; Tomlin, 2006; Yoon et al., 2018). According to Sawik
(2016), in make-to-order environments and customer-driven SCs, cus-
tomer service level is of particular importance, since it can be analyzed
as a substitute for shortage costs that are hard to estimate.


While studies have established a salience of resilient supplier se-
lection in recent years, much of it was focusing on forecasting the
disruption probabilities. We conceptualize an entirely different ap-
proach to analyzing the risk profiles of supplier performance under
uncertainty by utilizing the data analytics capabilities in smart manu-
facturing using the digital twin principles. Hence, uncertainties of the
environment are evaluated based on the learning of the system in terms
of suppliers performance in the SC. Digital SC twins were recently de-
fined as computerized models that represent the network state for any
given moment in time and allow for complete end-to-end SC visibility
to improve resilience and test contingency plans (Ivanov, 2019).


We develop a hybrid technique, combining simulation and SML and


examine its applications to data-driven decision-making support in re-
silient supplier selection. We consider on-time delivery (OTD), also
known as delivery reliability, an indicator for supplier reliability, and
explore the conditions surrounding the formation of resilient supply
performance profiles. Further, we theorize the notions of risk profile of
supplier performance and resilient SC performance. We define risk
profile of supplier performance as a set of negative outcomes in simu-
lation runs associated with a particular supplier in terms of failing to
meet the OTD requirement regarding the orders allocated at the sup-
plier. Resilient supply chain performance, in turn is abstracted to total
OTD of the SC regarding the customer demand (Ivanov, Tsipoulanidis,
& Schönberger, 2017; Karim, Samaranayake, Smith, & Halgamuge,
2010; Wieland & Marcus Wallenburg, 2013) as a composition of de-
livery date and delivery quantity.


We show that the associations of the deviations from the resilient
supply chain performance profile with the risk profiles of supplier
performance can be efficiently deciphered by our approach. The results
suggest that a combination of SML and simulation, if utilized properly,
improve the delivery reliability. Such a combination is unique in lit-
erature. It mimics the complexity of business reality affording a more
realistic approach to making sourcing decisions and appears to be more
relevant in practical environments. Our approach can also be of value
when analyzing the supplier base and uncovering the critical suppliers,
or combinations of suppliers the disruption at which results in the ad-
verse performance decreases. The results of this study contribute to the
understanding of the use of digital SC twins with the aim to improve
resilience by means of the combination of machine learning (ML) and
simulation. The proposed resilient supplier selection can be further
considered as a support system to design risk mitigation strategies in
the development of supplier portfolio, SC disruption management
models or investing in most important and risky suppliers.


The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pre-
sents current relevant literature concerning supplier selection ap-
proaches and data-driven decision support systems with consideration
of resilience. Section 3 describes a hybrid approach to supplier selec-
tion, combining simulation and ML. The results are discussed in Section
4 and managerial and theoretical implications are discussed in Section
5. Section 6 concludes the paper by highlighting the insights gained in
this study and outlining future research opportunities.


2. State-of-the-art


2.1. Supplier selection with resilience considerations


Our study builds on three conceptual perspectives. First and prin-
cipally, we greatly benefited from the literature on resilient supplier
selection. The second perspective is the application of ML techniques to
SC management. Finally, studies on data-driven decision support sys-
tems for supplier and disruption risk management pointed the direc-
tions in development of information management framework in our
model.


As SC structures become increasingly complex and global, manu-
facturing firms become increasingly dependent on their suppliers.
Complexity and globalization also increase SC risk exposure (Gao et al.,
2018). Hamdi, Ghorbel, Masmoudi, and Dupont (2018) state that the
best supplier is usually the one who can deliver the right product at the
right time, in the right place, in the right quantity at a competitive
price. Increased SC risk exposure forces the inclusion of resilience into
supplier selection procedures (Gao et al., 2018; He et al., 2018; Hosseini
& Barker, 2016; Ivanov, Dolgui, et al., 2017; Larson & Chang, 2016;
Weber & Current, 1993). The concept of SC resilience is defined by
Ivanov et al. (2019) as a complex characteristic of non-failure opera-
tion, durability, recoverability with the maintenance of SC processes
and the SC as a whole. Therefore, supplier selection has become a key
element in designing efficient, synchronized and resilient operations in
digital manufacturing SCs.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


87






Rajagopal et al. (2017) and Hamdi et al. (2018) carry out literature
reviews correlating topics of supplier selection and risk management in
the SC, the first being a subset of the second. According to Tomlin
(2006) and Dolgui, Ivanov, et al. (2018), the risks in SCs can be divided
into recurrent or disruptive. For Jüttner, Peck, and Christopher (2003),
risks in the SC can be classified as internal risks, SC risks or external
risks. The authors state the first arises within the organization, the
second arises externally to the organization but within the SC, and the
third arises externally and outside the SC, that is, it affects several
chains simultaneously.


Ivanov and Dolgui (2018) elaborate on the importance of increasing
SC resilience in efficient ways, i.e., achieving SC resileanness (re-
silient+ lean). As such, resilient supplier selection must be subject to a
multi-factor analysis. In his seminal paper, Dickson (1966) presents 23
criteria, of which quality, delivery and performance history are shown
to be the three most important factors in vendor selection. Drawing
from recent literature, Chen, Hsieh, and Wee (2016) cluster 11 main
criteria for supplier selection, alongside their definitions, these are: fi-
nance, quality, delivery, relationship, service, technology, supply fa-
cilities, management, efficacy, environment and risk factors. Therefore,
in this paper, delivery reliability assessed based on historical data is
considered to measure service level performance. Furthermore, Hamdi
et al. (2018) subdivides supplier selection decision approaches into
four: (i) quantitative, (ii) qualitative, (iii) using simulation tools and
(iv) using artificial intelligence. In quantitative approaches, the factors
or criteria under study can be measured and quantified numerically, for
instance, delivery reliability (Wetzstein et al., 2016). None of these
studies, though, formally examined the data analytics capabilities in
selecting the resilient supplier portfolios – a distinctive and significant
contribution made by our study. In our study, a hybrid approach in-
tegrating a simulation tool and SML techniques is developed and tested.


Rajesh and Ravi (2015) state resilience means the adaptive cap-
ability to respond to disruptions and recover from them. A resilient
supplier is able to provide good quality products at economic rates and
is flexible enough to accommodate demand fluctuations with shorter
LTs over a lower ambience of risk without compromising safety and
environmental practices (Rajesh & Ravi, 2015). Furthermore, the de-
velopment of SC resilience is of particular importance when developing
an agile SC in uncertain market conditions and flexibility strategies. For
example, dual or multiple sourcing are typically utilized to cope with
disruption risks and recovery measures (Gosling, Purvis, & Naim, 2010;
He et al., 2018; Ivanov, Dolgui, et al., 2017).


Torabi et al. (2015) propose a five-step method to enhance the
supply resilience level in a scenario-based, bi-objective, possibilistic
mixed integer linear model to build resilient supply bases for global
SCs. The computational experiments indicate the consideration of dis-
ruptive events can have significant impact on selected supply bases. The
authors introduce a new supply side objective function to calculate the
resilience level of the selected supply base and consider several stra-
tegies, such as suppliers’ business continuity plans, fortification of
suppliers and contracts with backup suppliers, to enhance the resilience
level of the supply network.


Sawik (2013a) states a resilient supply portfolio includes protected
suppliers that are capable of supplying despite disruption, as well as
having emergency inventory options which can be used to compensate
for the lost capacity of suppliers and to replace non-delivered parts
ordered from disrupted suppliers.


Bohner and Minner (2017) use a mixed-integer linear program ap-
proach to solve the supplier selection problem subject to disruptions.
The model considers backup suppliers and less risky, but more ex-
pensive, main supplier. They evaluate supplier selection performance in
terms of cost and trade-offs between economies of scale and failure risk.
Diverse techniques and methods, such as multi-objective mixed integer
programming, stochastic mixed integer programming, fuzzy analytic
hierarchy process, Bayesian network, conditional value-at-risk (CVaR),
worst-case CVaR, data envelopment analysis, technique for order of


preference by similarity to ideal solution and analytical approaches are
used to perform resilient supplier selection under operational and dis-
ruption risks (Ang et al., 2016; Chen, 2011; Dupont, Bernard, Hamdi, &
Masmoudi, 2018; Gao et al., 2018; PrasannaVenkatesan & Goh, 2016;
Sawik, 2013b; Viswanadham & Samvedi, 2013).


Vugrin, Warren, and Ehlen (2011) define the resilience capacity of a
system as a function of absorptive, adaptive, and restorative capacities.
Hosseini and Barker (2016) used this concept and extended it to the
supplier selection problem. First, absorptive capacity refers to the
ability to absorb shocks from disruptive events, implying proactive
planning or development of pre-disaster strategies. In the context of
supplier selection, the authors cite four main features: geographical
segregation, i.e., segregation of a supplier geographically from natural
disasters, surplus inventory, backup supplier contracting and physical
protection, i.e., security of suppliers’ facility from disruptive events.
Second, adaptive capacity is considered a temporary post-disaster
strategy, e.g., redundant transportation for use in non-standard re-
routing following disruption. Last, restorative capacity refers to the
recover phase and is the last line of defense against disruption.


Considering the SC as a whole, the dynamic nature of the supplier-
customer relationship influences disruption propagation, and therefore
the SC structure and dependence (Scheibe & Blackhurst, 2018). Wu and
Olson (2008) state long-term and permanent relationships in SCs
usually result in benefits such as lower purchase costs and can culmi-
nate in lower prices for the final customer. This perspective is echoed by
Sheffi and Rice (2005) and Chen et al. (2016), who emphasize that
loyalty in the supplier-customer relationship provides benefits to the SC
by making it more resilient to crisis and demand fluctuations. However,
the authors do not address the fact that in this period of digital trans-
formation firms are becoming more data-oriented and may even
overlap this loyal relationship between supplier-customer in decision-
making supplier selection processes.


Despite the significant advances achieved in recent years, the lit-
erature reviewed does not specify an explicit approach to using the
digital data in improving SC performance by building the resilient
supplier portfolios. While a growing body of literature pointed to the
importance of developing the resilient SC, less attention was directed to
the exploiting the resilience capabilities through a dynamic analysis of
SC performance (Ivanov, 2018; Ivanov, Tsipoulanidis, et al., 2017). An
important dimension in resilient supplier selection – the dynamic ana-
lysis of supplier performance risk profiles was left ignored. Given that
the relationship between suppliers and customers may become
ephemeral and strongly influenced by data with automated intelligent
decision-making, it is possible to perceive that new research opportu-
nities in this field will arise.


2.2. Data-driven decision support systems for supplier and disruption risk
management


Digital factory concepts share the attributes of smart networking
(Strozzi, Colicchia, Creazza, & Noè, 2017). The vision of Industry 4.0 is
that the manufacturing system contains all the relevant information
about its production and supply requirements. Digital technologies
enable flexible decision-making by providing real-time data for all parts
of the SC (Bounfour, 2016; Dubey et al., 2019; Wamba et al., 2017).


Dubey et al. (2015), Papadopoulos et al. (2017), Gunasekaran et al.
(2016), Choi, Wallace, and Wang (2018) and Nguyen, Li, Spiegler,
Ieromonachou, and Lin (2018) provide evidence that data analytics is
being applied to SC management in procurement, manufacturing shop
floors, routing optimization, real-time traffic operation monitoring,
proactive safety management, and in-transit inventory management in
logistics/transportation. Reducing SC cost as well as carbon emissions
are important tasks to consider in operational decisions in order to be
competitive in the digital manufacturing environment (Lamba & Singh,
2018; Lamba, Singh, & Mishra, 2019). Models providing optimal deci-
sions considering sustainable procurement and transportation based on


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


88






real data can be found in the literature (Kaur & Singh, 2017, 2018).
Furthermore, Kaur and Singh (2016) model sustainability-resilience
link at the supply chain design level through the procurement and lo-
gistics of raw material. Their model suggests there is a trade-off be-
tween lot-size orders, carbon emissions and SC resilience, meaning that
smaller lot-size leads to larger carbon emission due to transportation
and greater risk of supply chain disruption. A similar problem setting of
sustainable use of resources to build SC resilience can be found in
Pavlov, Ivanov, Pavlov, and Slinko (2019).


Papadopoulos et al. (2017) point out that data analytics can help
improve SC risk management and disaster-resistance. Choi and Lambert
(2017) and Choi, Chan, and Yue (2017) provide evidence of how data
analytics can be used to improve the resilience of SC operations by
utilizing firms databases and large volumes of data to predict risks,
assess vulnerability and enhance their SCs.


Simchi-Levi et al. (2015) present a data-driven system to analyze
supplier exposure in the automotive sector. This system estimates
supplier risk exposure, and evaluates pre-disruption risk mitigation
actions and optimal post-disruption contingency plan deployment. The
system integrates databases, a quantitative risk-exposure model, and an
output performance visualization tool. The data sources include mate-
rial requirements planning system, the purchasing database, and sales-
volume planning information based on the SC mapping methodology
(Gusikhin & Klampfl, 2012). The optimization engine uses the data to
test the various performance impacts of disruptions. Decision-makers in
procurement and risk specialists can use the system to track risk ex-
posures in real time as inventory levels fluctuate and the SC structure
evolves. The frequency of updates relies on the data-integration tech-
nology and the computational tractability of the optimization models.


Ivanov et al. (2018) show that data analytics can be used at the
planning stage to identify supplier risk exposure and can help at the
reactive stage to monitor and identify disruptions. They propose a
framework of integrated cyber-physical SC simulation and optimization
and relate this framework to system-cybernetics principles. Their re-
sults echo those in the study by Choi (2018) that presented a new
practical perspective on how big data related technologies can be used
for global SCs with a system of systems mindset.


2.3. ML applications to SCs and manufacturing


ML can be applied to resilient SCs. Baryannis, Validi, Dani, and
Antoniou (2018) summarize recent AI applications to SC risk manage-
ment and show future research opportunities in risk identification, as-
sessment and response. Priore, Ponte, Puente, and Gómez (2018) apply
ML to the dynamic selection of replenishment policies according to SC
environmental dynamics. ML techniques have been applied to detect
bottlenecks, high-risk tasks and events in order to achieve adequate
production rescheduling (Dolgui, Bakhtadze, et al., 2018; Ji & Wang,
2017). Palombarini and Martínez (2012) prototype an application that
performs rescheduling based on relational reinforcement learning (RL).


Shahzad and Mebarki (2012) propose framework based on data
mining for job shop scheduling problems (JSSPs) that identifies the
critical parameters and states of particular dynamic scheduling en-
vironments. Stricker, Kuhnle, Sturm, and Friess (2018), Waschneck
et al. (2018) and Li, Wang, and Sawhney (2012) use RL to solve the
JSSP. First, Stricker et al. (2018) develop an RL-based adaptive order
dispatching algorithm that can outperform existing rule-based heur-
istics approaches. Second, Waschneck et al. (2018) test an RL approach
in a simulation of a discrete event at a small semi-conductor factor and
observe that although the learning algorithms do not overcome the
heuristics, the RL was able to reach an expert knowledge level with two
days of training. Third, Li et al. (2012) investigate pricing, lead-time,
scheduling and order acceptance decisions in a make-to-order manu-
facturing system with stochastic demands in a discrete-event simulation
model. They develop an RL based Q-learning algorithm (QLA) and find
that the QLA performance is superior to the existing policies.


Tuncel, Zeid, and Kamarthi (2014) apply an RL approach to solve a
disassembly line balancing problem with uncertainty. Kartal, Oztekin,
Gunasekaran, and Cebi (2016) develop a hybrid methodology that in-
tegrates ML with multi-criteria decision-making techniques in order to
execute multi-attribute inventory analysis. The authors implemented
naive Bayes, Bayesian network, artificial neural networks (NN), and
support vector machine (SVM) algorithms to predict classes of initially
determined stock items in a large-scale automotive company. Sharp,
Ak, and Hedberg (2018) analyze approximately 4000 abstracts by
means of the Natural Language Processing technique and conclude that
generically applicable algorithms such as NNs and SVMs are gaining
popularity in the field of manufacturing.


Another application of ML to manufacturing is prediction of LT and
cycle time (CT) key performance indicators. Most production planning
and scheduling methods rely on LTs. The efficiency of these methods is
crucially affected by the accuracy of LT prediction (Gyulai et al., 2018).
The authors perform an LT prediction based on regression algorithms
for a real flow-shop environment exposed to frequent changes and
uncertainties resulting from the changing customer order stream.
Lingitz et al. (2018) use SML approaches to perform LT prediction
based on historical production data obtained from manufacturing ex-
ecution systems. CT forecasting is one of the most crucial issues for
production planning in terms of maintaining high delivery reliability in
semiconductor wafer fabrication systems (Wang, Yang, Zhang, Wang, &
Zhang, 2018). Wang, Zhang, and Wang (2018) use a recurrent NN to
model a CT forecast, estimating the short-term CT forecast of wafer lots.


Location awareness has high potential to produce valuable in-
formation in manufacturing facilities (Carrasco, Coronado, Parto, &
Kurfess, 2018). Technologies such as radio frequency identification
(RFID) and bluetooth low energy devices, e.g., beacons, enable the
collection of data pools from manufacturing shop-floors. Carrasco et al.
(2018) present a system that finds the nearest machine to a user. The
authors use nearest neighbor, weighted k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) and
Bayesian inference techniques. Solti, Raffel, Romagnoli, and Mendling
(2018) investigate the effectiveness and efficiency of outlier detection
methods for finding misplaced products in a real setting with an RFID
inventory robot. Their research suggests that ML techniques can be
effectively used to harness sensor systems for improved operational use
cases. Similarly, Kho, Lee, and Zhong (2018) use RFID technology to
capture real-time production data and then apply two ML techniques: k-
means clustering and gradient descent optimization. The authors state
that valid predictions about the expected overall manufacturing time
for a given number of manufacturing batch inputs can be obtained.


ML has been used to improve manufacturing at the process level.
For instance, Diaz-Rozo, Bielza, and Larra naga (2017) propose a cyber-
physical system (CPS) for machine component knowledge discovery
based on clustering algorithms using real data from a machining pro-
cess. Three clustering algorithms are compared – k-means, hierarchical
agglomerative and Gaussian mixture models – in terms of their con-
tribution to spindle performance knowledge during high throughput
machining operation. Furthermore, Kruger, Shih, Hattingh, and van
Niekerk (2011) show that the process optimization is capable of
learning and optimizing a high-volume gun drilling process. The
learning process generated regression models for the manufacturing
process and the agent was able to determine the optimal trade-off be-
tween the technical and economic factors.


Guo, Yuan, and Tian (2009) present a SVM model combined with
decision tree (DT) to address issues on supplier selection including
feature selection, and multi-class classification. Mirkouei and Haapala
(2014) also use SVM and DT integrated with a mathematical pro-
gramming approach to supplement existing supplier selection methods
in a biomass-to-biofuel SC.


Although ML is not a favorable method for all industrial problems,
encouraging the application of learning algorithms can contribute to
the achievement of autonomous production systems (Stricker et al.,
2018). Kusiak (2017) highlights five gaps in manufacturing innovation


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


89






in the digital transformation era: (i) adopt data strategies, (ii) improve
data collection, use and sharing, (iii) design predictive models, (iv)
study general predictive models and (v) connect factories and control
processes. Therefore, since ML provides intelligent outcomes from data,
a close follow up in this research field is fundamental to innovation in a
resilient data-driven manufacturing environment.


Despite of significant advances in ML application to SC and opera-
tions management achieved recently, the literature does not specify
directions as to how to make use of digital data and to utilize the ML
advantages to build resilient supplier portfolios. As a result, it is not yet
clear how ML can contribute to the conceptual and technological fra-
meworks of resilient supplier selection. This also means that the causes
of SC performance perturbations due to disruptions in supply base have
not been entirely disentangled from the risk profiles of supplier per-
formance.


3. Digital manufacturing experimentation


In this section, a digital manufacturing experiment is described,
which adopts a hybrid approach in combination with simulation and
ML models and integrates these within the context of supplier selection.


3.1. Simulation model


Simulations make use of agents, system dynamics and discrete
events to gain a better understanding of interactions and support the
deployment of organizational networks (Durugbo et al., 2013). In this
study, the simulation model is performed with Anylogic software and
represents a make-to-order manufacturing system which has up to four
raw material suppliers. Fig. 1 illustrates the information and materials
flows in the simulation model.


According to the model parameters, raw material orders only occur
after a customer order is consolidated and raw material is the only
necessary supply to manufacture the final product. The purchase orders
are characterized by normal distributions as shown in Bodaghi, Jolai,
and Rabbani (2018) as well as demand uncertainty. Furthermore, it is
assumed only one type of product being delivered and price and sup-
plier competition analysis are neglected.


Supplier performance is modeled in way that is similar to that of
Tomlin (2006): one supplier may be unreliable in a certain period and
also may have deterministic capacity limitations. In this paper, four


possible suppliers are considered and the previously mentioned re-
strictions influence the delivery performance of suppliers, which is
modeled according to a normal distribution.


3.2. ML model


ML addresses the question of how to build computers that improve
automatically through experience. It is one of the most rapidly growing
technical fields, lying at the intersection of computer science and sta-
tistics, and at the edge of artificial intelligence and data science (Jordan
& Mitchell, 2015). In this work, the ML model is implemented using the
Scikit-Learn package, which is defined by Pedregosa et al. (2011) as a
Python module that integrates a wide range of state-of-the-art ML al-
gorithms for medium-scale supervised and unsupervised problems.
Moreover, other packages such as Numpy, Matplotlib and Pandas are
also used to perform data preprocessing, data analysis and visualization
tasks. Fig. 2 shows the supplier selection model using SML.


The preprocessing step can often have a significant impact on the
generalized performance of a SML algorithm and may include sub-
steps, such as data cleaning, normalization, transformation, feature
extraction and selection, etc. (Kotsiantis, Kanellopoulos, & Pintelas,
2006). In this work, since data is generated from a simulation, the
database is of good quality: such issues as missing values, impossible
data combination (e.g., negative number of products), zero values etc.
rarely occur. Therefore, the preprocessing step is simpler when dealing
with simulation models as compared to real databases.


Manufacturing problems can often be labeled and specialist feed-
backs are available, therefore SML techniques are recommended for
manufacturing applications (Wuest et al., 2016). The labels in SML may
be of discrete or continuous type and can be managed by classification
or regression algorithms, respectively (Ribeiro, Grolinger, & Capretz,
2015). The classification is used for prediction, pattern recognition and
detection of anomalous values while regression is used for prediction
and ranking. Two SML algorithms are used for classification in this
work: k-NN and Logistic Regression (LR).


The k-NN algorithm is a non-parametric procedure, i.e., it does not
assume prior knowledge of statistical distributions, that assigns to the
unclassified instance the nearest instance label using geometric dis-
tances (Cover & Hart, 1967). Although LR contains the word regression,
it is a learning algorithm used to classify or predict the probability of
occurrence of an event by adapting the data to a logistic function and


Fig. 1. Make-to-order simulation model.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


90






can be used for situations in which the dependent variable is a binary
(Yu & Liu, 2011). In addition, LR is a resource that allows estimating
the probability associated with the occurrence of a particular event in
the face of a set of explanatory variables, i.e., variables that affect the
system response and can be defined by the researcher.


The k-NN algorithm is the most common classification algorithm in
cases where there is no prior knowledge of data distribution (Li, Kong,
Ma, Gong, & Huai, 2016), and LR is based on supervised learning,
which organizes itself according to the nature of the input data and
there is little need to know about the characteristics of this input data
(Yu & Liu, 2011). Although it is known the simulation utilizes normal
distribution, in real cases data is likely to differ from a well-behaved
normal distribution, so the SML model does not take advantage of any
prior knowledge about the system behavior in order to better represent
a real case. The aim of the model is to select suppliers with the best
chance of delivering an order on time based on past data.


In this work, past data is categorized as (i) deliveries on-time and
(ii) late deliveries. The k-NN algorithm is applied separately for each of
the two datasets and maps the suppliers’ performance according to the
previously mentioned characteristics of the model: date and order
quantity. In LR, both datasets are the input data and the expected result
for each customer order is the probability of each supplier delivering
the order within the expected time frame. Therefore, the risk profile
represents the probability of success in predicting the supplier behavior
in the system regarding the target feature, which is the OTD in this
model.


The LR algorithm draws a risk profile for each supplier based on the
model's input data, i.e., relevant features that influence the OTD per-
formance for each order: date and order quantity. The output data from
this profile is the probability of success in delivering that order on time.
After this, through a ranking of the suppliers, the less risky supplier for
that particular order is selected. The k-NN algorithm considers the same


input data and the algorithm predicts which supplier has the greatest
probability of delivering an order on time and which supplier has the
greatest probability of performing a late delivery. After this, the sup-
plier with the greatest chance of delivering the order on time is se-
lected.


In addition, a combination of these two techniques is presented in
this paper. The first, Hybrid A, confronts the results of both algorithms’
classification without considering the accuracy of each technique. The
second, Hybrid B, takes the same approach, but considers the accuracy
of each classifier.


The accuracy for the k-NN model is the rate in which the model
correctly predicts the real outcome. For instance, acca and accb stand for
the accuracy of the k-NN model which uses the deliveries on-time and
late deliveries categorizations, respectively. Furthermore, Rka and Rkb
stand for the k-NN classifier results using the deliveries on-time and late
deliveries categorizations, respectively.


The accuracy for the LR model is the area under the receiving op-
erating characteristic (ROC) curve. The area under the curve (AUC) can
vary from 0 to 1 and a value of 0.5 is considered a random prediction
performance. Fawcett (2006) presents a detailed explanation of ROC
curve analysis. Moreover, Rlr1 and Rlr2 represent the results for the first
and second suppliers most likely to meet the demand on time according
to the LR classifier, respectively. Both pseudo-codes are presented as
follows.


Algorithm 1. Hybrid A


1: procedure SELECTION(d, q)▷ date and quantity
2: if Rlr1= Rkb then
3: return Rka
4: else
5: return Rlr1
6: end if
7: end procedure


Fig. 2. Supplier selection model using supervised machine learning.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


91






3.3. Integration


The integration of the simulation and ML models is accomplished
through the data exchange results of each model. In this work, the data
exchange is achieved with the help of text format files. The sequence of
activities for this integration can be summarized in three steps, as
shown in Fig. 3.


The first step consists of (i) database generation by means of a si-
mulation model. In step two (ii) this database is used as input data in
the ML model and then intelligent decision-making results are gener-
ated in an output file, which serves as input data to the test simulation
experiment. Finally, in step three (iii) the test simulation results are
compiled and analyzed.


3.4. Numerical experiment


Under the framework shown in Sections 3.1–3.3, we now introduce
a scenario under which our modelling methodology would be deployed.
In order to evaluate the developed approach, a numerical experiment


was conducted. The experiment takes place in a time window of 4
years, in which 50% of the period is used as a training data set, 25% for
model validation and tuning and the last 25% as test data. During the
training phase, the order allocation to suppliers is random to generate
the database of suppliers’ performance. Next, SML models train on the
training dataset and perform the order allocation to suppliers in test
phase. Both algorithms, i.e., LR and k-NN make order allocation to-
wards suppliers which have greatest probability of success in delivering
a specific order on time. The performance of the SML models refer only
to the results obtained in the test phase.


Algorithm 2. Hybrid B


procedure SELECTION(d, q)▷ date and quantity
2: if AUC≥ acca then


if AUC≥ accb then
4: return Rlr1


else
6: if Rkb= Rlr1 then


return Rlr2
8: else


return Rlr1
10: end if


end if
12: else


if AUC≥ accb then
14: if Rka= Rkb then


if Rka=Rlr1 then
16: return Rlr2


else
18: return Rlr1


end if
20: else


return Rka
22: end if


Fig. 3. Integration between simulation and machine learning models.


Fig. 4. ROC curve of all suppliers (S1 to S4).


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


92






else
24: return Rka


end if
26: end if


end procedure


The first scenario assumes full availability of the four suppliers. The
second scenario assumes unavailability of two suppliers due to a dis-
ruption in the system, so only two suppliers are available in the testing
phase. Therefore, the supplier selection performance will be evaluated
by comparing (i) random choice of suppliers, which shows that this
kind of data analysis does not exist – correlation between date and
order quantity, (ii) using k-NN and (iii) LR algorithms, as well as the
combination of these two techniques by means of (iv) Hybrid A and (v)
Hybrid B algorithms in both scenarios.


4. Results and discussion


In this section the experiment results are presented using the com-
bination of simulation and SML algorithms for resilient supplier selec-
tion. First, the LR performance is shown using four different seeds (n1 to
n4), as shown in Fig. 4, which translates the prediction accuracy of each
supplier given order date and quantity characteristics.


For instance, since the AUC of Supplier 1 and 3 (S1 and S3) is inferior
to that of the AUC of Supplier 2 and 4 (S2 and S4), it is possible to
conclude that based on past data, LR predicts the behavior of S2 and S4
better than that of S1 and S3. Thus, depending on suppliers’ char-
acteristics, more accurate models can be found using the same algo-
rithm. In addition, an extract of S1 and S2 ROC curves using different
simulation seeds is shown in Fig. 5. It can be observed there is a con-
vergence aspect of S2 compared to S1. This can be explained by the well
defined capacity restriction that has been modeled for S2 compared to
S1, which makes S2 more predictable.


Furthermore, a classification sample analyzed via the LR algorithm
is shown in Table 1. The algorithm quantifies the probability of each
supplier delivering each order on time based exclusively on past data.
This approach includes an important aspect of human bias avoidance
and the potential to support the decision-making process using other
quantitative and qualitative approaches. In this paper, the LR performs
the supplier selection both singularly and in combination with k-NN.


As mentioned in Section 3.2, the performance of k-NN algorithm is
measured by its accuracy. A set of five different simulation seeds, as
presented in Fig. 6, illustrate the accuracy of the k-NN algorithm in this
model. In this study, two predictions are made regarding the k-NN
model using (i) the on-time delivery categorization and (ii) the delayed
delivery categorization. In other words, the model suggests the supplier
most likely to deliver a specific order on time and also the supplier most
likely to perform a delayed delivery, respectively.


The results show the potential use of SML models as tools for


decision-making support. Simulations using different seeds were per-
formed to test the performance of these models based on delivery re-
liability, which stands proxy for the rate of successful on-time de-
liveries.


Two simulations were performed based on the two previously
mentioned scenarios in Section 3.4. Each simulation is repeated using
five different seeds and the final results are presented in Fig. 7 ac-
cording to the mean values.


The experiment results suggest that a higher number of suppliers
leads to a more resilient system, which can cope with disruptions and
recurrent risks. In part, this is due to the fact there are more assertive
models of adequate suppliers for a specific order. More evaluation op-
tions to be evaluated are available from which to make good choice.
However, it is worth mentioning there is a trade-off – since the number
of orders in the period does not change, a higher number of suppliers
leads to less data being analyzed for each of them. For instance, in this
experiment the total number of orders is 2921. Thus, with less known


Fig. 5. ROC curve of S1 and S2 after simulation with four different seeds (n1 to n4).


Table 1
LR probability predictions for each supplier and selection results.


Order S1 S2 S3 S4 Rlr1 Rlr2


1 0.4361 0.1972 0.4980 0.1887 S3 S1
2 0.3319 0.3402 0.6014 0.3642 S3 S4
… … … … … … …
454 0.6236 0.2755 0.3248 0.2475 S1 S3
455 0.3313 0.9232 0.6015 0.9493 S4 S2
… … … … … … …
729 0.3230 0.0730 0.6108 0.0672 S3 S1
730 0.4156 0.2006 0.5178 0.1947 S3 S1


Fig. 6. Accuracy comparison of k-NN model under five different simulation
seeds.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


93






information about a given supplier, there is a tendency towards poor
representation of reality by the model, which means less accuracy,
followed by poorer results with which to obtain a resilient supplier
selection.


It can also be observed that the mixed use of the SML algorithms led
to an improvement in the delivery reliability of suppliers. For example,
using the random approach to supplier selection, meaning this kind of
data is not analyzed by SML, the delivery reliability is 44.03%.
Adopting the Hybrid B model, the result increases to 46.16%. This
means 62 late deliveries were avoided with the simple use of data that a
priori would not be analyzed.


When generalizing the results of this study, it can be observed that
Big Data is worthless if not leveraged to drive decision-making
(Gandomi & Haider, 2015). In a society increasingly influenced by data-
driven decision-making, the use of any and all kinds of data have the
potential to generate new forms of decision-making and negotiation
mechanisms. Emerging services and analytics, including merged tech-
nologies such as data warehouse, ML, visualization (Larson & Chang,
2016), are a new form of value creation in the era of digital manu-
facturing. Therefore, a complex and disruptive reality emerges and
strategic and tactical decisions must consider the impact of digital
fragmentation in all aspects of the business (Abbosh, Nunes, &
Ovanessoff, 2017), including the fragmentation of relationships be-
tween manufacturing firms.


The experiment results show that a combination of SML and simu-
lation can help in specifying a risk profile for each order, i.e., based on
two features (delivery time and quantity) that have a causality re-
lationship to OTD. The SC managers can obtain the estimations of what
suppliers, or combinations of suppliers are most critical in terms of the
disruptions and the resulting SC performance impact. As such the
managers can explicitly use a causality relationship of the parameters in
risk profiles of supplier performance with OTD (or any other KPI) that
in turn, could feed risk mitigation and building resilient supplier pro-
files. These risk profiles, which are built based on past data, can help
creating continuous improvement strategies for supplier portfolio de-
velopment.


Ad-hoc customer-supplier relationships may arise from the adoption
of a data-driven culture in manufacturing firms. For instance, a data-
driven culture affects the bargaining power of companies, which could
be represented by smart contracts based on supplier selection predictive
models. In addition, by collecting and analyzing performance data from
suppliers, it could be possible to contribute to more robust risk man-
agement models, which in turn would increase SC resilience.


Digital manufacturing points to the direction of convergence be-
tween real and digital worlds by means of massive use of data and di-
gital twins drive agile experimentation to enhance production systems.
Experience-based decision-making tends to be replaced or, at least,


strongly supported by data-driven decision-making. A priori, the re-
silient supplier selection has a role of decision-making support since it is
an intrinsic multi-criteria decision problem and must consider strategic
decisions. Therefore, the adoption of resilient supplier selection in
combination with the strategic decision-making level has potential to
compose a robust system of supplier selection in a digital manu-
facturing environment.


5. Managerial implications and theoretical contributions


Several managerial implications can be highlighted from this work,
these insights may pose directions to future practical implementations
to resilient SC development. First, our analysis shows an information
method to integrate simulation and ML models that can evaluate digital
services performance in manufacturing. Since it is a fully digital ap-
proach, it can be valuable for prototyping and validating new services
in less time and cost within digital manufacturing context. Second, the
adoption of a data-driven culture in manufacturing enterprises may
result in ad-hoc customer-supplier relationships. This can happen due to
the possibility of developing bias-free ML models, which means deci-
sion-making can be exclusively result-oriented. Third, the model uti-
lizes data that does not require any expensive data acquisition system,
therefore this kind of approach can be seen essential to increment the
rate of early adopters of digital manufacturing. In addition, data man-
agement must consider strategic decisions to unlock benefits and de-
velop data strategies within manufacturing firms. Forth, intelligent and
agile decision-making is considered essential to develop resilient SCs,
therefore digital twins are useful to prospect scenarios in order to
achieve resilient systems by performing proactive agile experimenta-
tion.


Furthermore, some theoretical contributions are emphasized. First,
the use of SML based on existing databases may boost SC risk man-
agement models. This can happen because the use of SML models allow
the reduction of abstractions of risk management models by analysing
past data and presenting pattern recognition outcomes that can sub-
stitute diverse simplifying hypothesis. Second, rule-based systems
combining learning algorithms can increment overall system perfor-
mance. In this work, two algorithms (Hybrid A and B) improved overall
delivery reliability by manipulating the accuracy of learning algo-
rithms. Third, as the proposed model is based on a learning process, it
has potential to confer adaptability to the decision-making process and
can dynamically analyse past data in order to make better decisions.
Forth, previous researches using ML to solve supplier selection do not
have presented simulation approaches, which are likely to gain mo-
mentum with the digitization of manufacturing assets by IoT devices.
Therefore, this work contributes to the vision of using manufacturing
simulation in a new way, i.e., as a provider of synthetic data to train ML
models that address SC resilience. Finally, manufacturing is becoming
increasingly dependent on statistical methods and there is a wide
variety of data analytics approaches that could be experimented to
solve classical manufacturing problems.


6. Conclusion


In this paper, we introduced a new approach to resilient supplier
selection that utilizes the advances in data analytics while avoiding two
major inconveniences, namely the need to estimate the likelihood of
disruptions and forecasting the performance impacts. One difficulty in
managing the resilient supplier portfolios using disruption probability
estimations is a relative rarity of risk events which are too intermittent
and irregular to be accurately identified, estimated, and forecasted.
Instead of estimating probabilities of highly unpredictable events, the
emphasis of our study shifts to utilizing the advantages of digital data in
smart manufacturing systems to predict the supplier proneness to dis-
ruptions, and the associated impact on SC performance. A specific focus
of analysis was directed toward resilient supplier selection in digital


Fig. 7. Delivery reliability performance after supplier selection using su-
pervised machine learning.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


94






manufacturing. The test cases were performed in a digital make-to-
order manufacturing environment using a simulation tool. The results
indicate that the use of SML algorithms can support the resilient sup-
plier selection decision-making process, leading to more predictable
delivery from suppliers and improvements in risk mitigation decision-
making. The application of this approach requires a change of mindset
regarding the customer-supplier relationship, meaning that these rela-
tions should be more ephemeral and data-oriented so that resilient
supplier portfolios can be developed and resilient SCs can be achieved.


Two significant contributions emerge. First, we show that the as-
sociations of the deviations from the resilient SC performance profile
with the risk profiles of supplier performance can be efficiently deci-
phered by a combination of SML and simulation. Second, the results of
this study advance the understanding about how and when ML and
simulation can be combined to create digital SC twins, and through
these twins improve resilience. The outcomes of this study can emerge
in a number of useful insights for managers such as a development of
most critical suppliers, re-engineering of supplier base, investments in
SC resilience, order allocation improvement or even an acquisition of a
risky but very important supplier. The findings suggest that our model
can be of value in revealing latent, high-risk supplier portfolios, and
prioritizing risk mitigation efforts. In the experiment, the suppliers had
restrictions on production capacity in certain periods and were re-
presented in a dataset divided by categories, such as order date and
order quantity. The SML model was able to predict the performance of
the suppliers when variations in these categorizations had occurred.


The use of SML can contribute to supplier selection as a risk miti-
gation strategy that could assist optimization and resilience manage-
ment models. With the advent of Big Data availability, decision-making
in manufacturing will become increasingly dependent on statistical
methods. Hence, it is essential to pave the way for replacing abstrac-
tions with ML models in manufacturing risk management processes, so
that value creation can be perceived by practitioners and real data
shared, leading to a virtuous circle of improvement.


Finally, some limitations and future research avenues may be
highlighted. First, the advantages of using ML techniques can become
more evident when considering larger data sets. Those advantages can
be manifested in faster processing times and better causality recogni-
tion as compared to traditional statistical methods. Since the di-
mensionality of our data set is quite small and restricted to two para-
meters (i.e., delivery time and quantity), other statistical methods could
have been used for our specific model, but on the other hand, such
methods could not be feasible in real applications. In real supplier da-
tabases, there would be multiple parameters in the SC resilience ana-
lysis. The use of ML could suit better to such an increased complexity
and can be of value at manufacturing firms with a data-driven culture.
Second, although the model considers stochastic variations to approx-
imate to a real case, the model is still based on fictional data: the results
are subject to variations in real case scenarios. For real case applications
in data-oriented firms, more features will exist because of the increase
in data availability. In these cases, previous feature selection can be
used to identify the most relevant features in the prediction model, or
deep learning techniques should be considered. To that end, the si-
mulation model can be extended by adding product variability, trans-
port costs, and other customized features. In addition, it is possible to
investigate different SML algorithms, as well as new methods of com-
bining two or more of these algorithms while considering the respective
accuracy of each.


These limitations imply a number of possible extensions of this work
in future. For example, a differentiation of supplier profiles can be
considered, e.g., a more resilient supplier has higher costs, or a varia-
tion in available quantity is different at different suppliers, or a price
competition between suppliers. Furthermore, the use of rule-based
systems combining different learning algorithms showed overall system
performance improvement. This may be an indicative that the use of
learning subsystems via meta-learning may yield even better


performances specially when modelling in more complex scenarios.
These extensions would also be favorable by introducing other meth-
odological aspects, e.g., deep learning techniques which might be
helpful in detecting multiple causalities and improving the model per-
formance.


References


Abbosh, O., Nunes, P., & Ovanessoff, A. (2017). Adapting your digital business to a
fragmented world. Harvard Business Review, 95, 56–61.


Akter, S., Bandara, R., Hani, U., Wamba, S. F., Foropon, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019).
Analytics-based decision-making for service systems: A qualitative study and agenda
for future research. International Journal of Information Management, 48, 85–95.


Altay, N., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2018). Agility and resilience as
antecedents of supply chain performance under moderating effects of organizational
culture within the humanitarian setting: A dynamic capability view. Production
Planning & Control, 29, 1158–1174.


Ang, E., Iancu, D. A., & Swinney, R. (2016). Disruption risk and optimal sourcing in
multitier supply networks. Management Science, 63, 2397–2419.


Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2018). Supply chain risk management
and artificial intelligence: State of the art and future research directions. International
Journal of Production Research, 1–24.


Bodaghi, G., Jolai, F., & Rabbani, M. (2018). An integrated weighted fuzzy multi-objec-
tive model for supplier selection and order scheduling in a supply chain. International
Journal of Production Research, 56, 3590–3614.


Bohner, C., & Minner, S. (2017). Supplier selection under failure risk, quantity and
business volume discounts. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 104, 145–155.


Bounfour, A. (2016). Digital futures, digital transformation. Springer.
Carrasco, U., Coronado, P. D. U., Parto, M., & Kurfess, T. (2018). Indoor location service


in support of a smart manufacturing facility. Computers in Industry, 103, 132–140.
Chae, B. K. (2019). A general framework for studying the evolution of the digital in-


novation ecosystem: The case of big data. International Journal of Information
Management, 45, 83–94.


Chen, A., Hsieh, C.-Y., & Wee, H. (2016). A resilient global supplier selection strategy – A
case study of an automotive company. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 87, 1475–1490.


Chen, Y.-J. (2011). Structured methodology for supplier selection and evaluation in a
supply chain. Information Sciences, 181, 1651–1670.


Choi, T.-M. (2018). A system of systems approach for global supply chain management in
the big data era. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 46, 91–97.


Choi, T.-M., Chan, H. K., & Yue, X. (2017). Recent development in big data analytics for
business operations and risk management. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 47,
81–92.


Choi, T.-M., & Lambert, J. H. (2017). Advances in risk analysis with big data. Risk
Analysis, 37, 1435–1442.


Choi, T.-M., Wallace, S. W., & Wang, Y. (2018). Big data analytics in operations man-
agement. Production and Operations Management, 27, 1868–1883.


Cover, T., & Hart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 13, 21–27.


Das, A., Narasimhan, R., & Talluri, S. (2006). Supplier integration – Finding an optimal
configuration. Journal of Operations Management, 24, 563–582.


Dey, P. K., Bhattacharya, A., Ho, W., & Clegg, B. (2015). Strategic supplier performance
evaluation: A case-based action research of a UK manufacturing organisation.
International Journal of Production Economics, 166, 192–214.


Diaz-Rozo, J., Bielza, C., & Larra naga, P. (2017). Machine learning-based CPS for clus-
tering high throughput machining cycle conditions. Procedia Manufacturing, 10,
997–1008.


Dickson, G. W. (1966). An analysis of vendor selection systems and decisions. Journal of
Purchasing, 2, 5–17.


Dolgui, A., Bakhtadze, N., Pyatetsky, V., Sabitov, R., Smirnova, G., Elpashev, D., et al.
(2018a). Data mining-based prediction of manufacturing situations. IFAC-
PapersOnLine, 51, 316–321.


Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2018b). Ripple effect in the supply chain: An
analysis and recent literature. International Journal of Production Research, 56,
414–430.


Duan, Y., Edwards, J. S., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2019). Artificial intelligence for decision
making in the era of big data-evolution, challenges and research agenda. International
Journal of Information Management, 48, 63–71.


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Childe, S. J. (2015). The design of a responsive sustainable
supply chain network under uncertainty. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 80, 427–445.


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S., Fosso Wamba, S., Roubaud, D., & Forupon, C.
(2019). Empirical investigation of data analytics capability and organizational flex-
ibility as complements to supply chain resilience. International Journal of Production
Research.


Dupont, L., Bernard, C., Hamdi, F., & Masmoudi, F. (2018). Supplier selection under risk
of delivery failure: A decision-support model considering managers risk sensitivity.
International Journal of Production Research, 56, 1054–1069.


Durugbo, C., Tiwari, A., & Alcock, J. R. (2013). Modelling information flow for organi-
sations: A review of approaches and future challenges. International Journal of
Information Management, 33, 597–610.


Elluru, S., Gupta, H., Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2017). Proactive and reactive models for
disaster resilient supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 1–26.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


95



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0145




Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27,
861–874.


Frazzon, E. M., Kück, M., & Freitag, M. (2018). Data-driven production control for
complex and dynamic manufacturing systems. CIRP Annals.


Gandomi, A., & Haider, M. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and
analytics. International Journal of Information Management, 35, 137–144.


Gao, S. Y., Simchi-Levi, D., Teo, C.-P., & Yan, Z. (2018). Disruption risk mitigation in
supply chains – The risk exposure index revisited. Operations Research.


Gosling, J., Purvis, L., & Naim, M. M. (2010). Supply chain flexibility as a determinant of
supplier selection. International Journal of Production Economics, 128, 11–21.


Grant, D., & Yeo, B. (2018). A global perspective on tech investment, financing, and ICT
on manufacturing and service industry performance. International Journal of
Information Management, 43, 130–145.


Gunasekaran, A., Kumar Tiwari, M., Dubey, R., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2016). Big Data and
predictive analytics applications in supply chain management. Computers and
Industrial Engineering, 101, 525–527.


Guo, X., Yuan, Z., & Tian, B. (2009). Supplier selection based on hierarchical potential
support vector machine. Expert Systems with Applications, 36, 6978–6985.


Gusikhin, O., & Klampfl, E. (2012). JEDI: Just-in-time execution and distribution information
support system for automotive stamping operations. Decision policies for production net-
works. Springer119–142.


Gyulai, D., Pfeiffer, A., Nick, G., Gallina, V., Sihn, W., & Monostori, L. (2018). Lead time
prediction in a flow-shop environment with analytical and machine learning ap-
proaches. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 51, 1029–1034.


Hamdi, F., Ghorbel, A., Masmoudi, F., & Dupont, L. (2018). Optimization of a supply
portfolio in the context of supply chain risk management: Literature review. Journal
of Intelligent Manufacturing, 29, 763–788.


He, J., Alavifard, F., Ivanov, D., & Jahani, H. (2018). A real-option approach to mitigate
disruption risk in the supply chain. Omega, 08, 008 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.


Hosseini, S., & Barker, K. (2016). A Bayesian network model for resilience-based supplier
selection. International Journal of Production Economics, 180, 68–87.


Hosseini, S., Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019a). Review of quantitative methods for supply
chain resilience analysis. Transportation Review: Part E, 125, 285–307.


Hosseini, S., Morshedlou, N., Ivanov, D., Sarder, M. D., Barker, K., & Al Khaled, A.
(2019b). Resilient sup-plier selection and optimal order allocation under disruption
risks. International Journal of Production Economics, 03, 018. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijpe.2019.03.018.


Ismagilova, E., Hughes, L., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Raman, K. R. (2019). Smart cities: Advances
in research—An information systems perspective. International Journal of Information
Management, 47, 88–100.


Ivanov, D. (2018). Structural dynamics and resilience in supply chain risk management.
Springer.


Ivanov, D. (2019). Managing risks in supply chains with digital twins and simulation, White
paper.


Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2018). Low-Certainty-Need (LCN) supply chains: A new per-
spective in managing disruption risks and resilience. International Journal of
Production Research, 1–18.


Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). The impact of digital technology and
Industry 4.0 on the ripple effect and supply chain risk analytics. International Journal
of Production Research, 57(3), 829–846.


Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Sokolov, B., & Ivanova, M. (2017). Literature review on disruption
recovery in the supply chain. International Journal of Production Research, 55,
6158–6174.


Ivanov, D., Tsipoulanidis, A., & Schönberger, J. (2017). Global supply chain and operations
management. A decision-oriented introduction to the creation of value.


Ji, W., & Wang, L. (2017). Big data analytics based fault prediction for shop floor sche-
duling. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 43, 187–194.


Jordan, M. I., & Mitchell, T. M. (2015). Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and
prospects. Science, 349, 255–260.


Jüttner, U., Peck, H., & Christopher, M. (2003). Supply chain risk management: Outlining
an agenda for future research. International Journal of Logistics: Research and
Applications, 6, 197–210.


Karim, M. A., Samaranayake, P., Smith, A., & Halgamuge, S. K. (2010). An on-time de-
livery improvement model for manufacturing organisations. International Journal of
Production Research, 48, 2373–2394.


Kartal, H., Oztekin, A., Gunasekaran, A., & Cebi, F. (2016). An integrated decision ana-
lytic framework of machine learning with multi-criteria decision making for multi-
attribute inventory classification. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 101, 599–613.


Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2016). Sustainable procurement and logistics for disaster resilient
supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 1–46.


Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2017). Modeling low carbon procurement and logistics in supply
chain: A key towards sustainable production. Sustainable Production and Consumption,
11, 5–17.


Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2018). Heuristic modeling for sustainable procurement and lo-
gistics in a supply chain using big data. Computers & Operations Research, 98,
301–321.


Kho, D. D., Lee, S., & Zhong, R. Y. (2018). Big data analytics for processing time analysis
in an IoT-enabled manufacturing shop floor. Procedia Manufacturing, 26, 1411–1420.


Kotsiantis, S., Kanellopoulos, D., & Pintelas, P. (2006). Data preprocessing for supervised
leaning. International Journal of Computer Science, 1, 111–117.


Kruger, G. H., Shih, A. J., Hattingh, D. G., & van Niekerk, T. I. (2011). Intelligent machine
agent architecture for adaptive control optimization of manufacturing processes.
Advanced Engineering Informatics, 25, 783–796.


Kshetri, N. (2018). Blockchain's roles in meeting key supply chain management objec-
tives. International Journal of Information Management, 39, 80–89.


Kull, T. J., & Talluri, S. (2008). A supply risk reduction model using integrated


multicriteria decision making. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 55,
409–419.


Kumar, A., Mangla, S. K., Luthra, S., Rana, N. P., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2018). Predicting
changing pattern: Building model for consumer decision making in digital market.
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 31, 674–703.


Kumar, R., Singh, S. P., & Lamba, K. (2018). Sustainable robust layout using big data
approach: A key towards Industry 4.0. Journal of Cleaner Production, 204, 643–659.


Kusiak, A. (2017). Smart manufacturing must embrace big data. Nature News, 544, 23.
Kusiak, A. (2018). Smart manufacturing. International Journal of Production Research, 56,


508–517.
Lamba, K., & Singh, S. P. (2017). Big data in operations and supply chain management:


Current trends and future perspectives. Production Planning & Control, 28, 877–890.
Lamba, K., & Singh, S. P. (2018). Dynamic supplier selection and lot-sizing problem


considering carbon emissions in a big data environment. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change.


Lamba, K., Singh, S. P., & Mishra, N. (2019). Integrated decisions for supplier selection
and lot-sizing considering different carbon emission regulations in big data en-
vironment. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 128, 1052–1062.


Larson, D., & Chang, V. (2016). A review and future direction of agile, business in-
telligence, analytics and data science. International Journal of Information
Management, 36, 700–710.


Li, N., Kong, H., Ma, Y., Gong, G., & Huai, W. (2016). Human performance modeling for
manufacturing based on an improved KNN algorithm. The International Journal of
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 84, 473–483.


Li, X., Wang, J., & Sawhney, R. (2012). Reinforcement learning for joint pricing, lead-time
and scheduling decisions in make-to-order systems. European Journal of Operational
Research, 221, 99–109.


Liao, Y., Deschamps, F., Loures, E.d. F. R., & Ramos, L. F. P. (2017). Past, present and
future of Industry 4.0—A systematic literature review and research agenda proposal.
International Journal of Production Research, 55, 3609–3629.


Lingitz, L., Gallina, V., Ansari, F., Gyulai, D., Pfeiffer, A., & Monostori, L. (2018). Lead
time prediction using machine learning algorithms: A case study by a semiconductor
manufacturer. Procedia CIRP, 72, 1051–1056.


Liu, S., Chan, F. T., Yang, J., & Niu, B. (2018). Understanding the effect of cloud com-
puting on organizational agility: An empirical examination. International Journal of
Information Management, 43, 98–111.


Mirkouei, A., & Haapala, K. R. (2014). Integration of machine learning and mathematical
programming methods into the biomass feedstock supplier selection process. Flexible
Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing.


Narasimhan, R., & Talluri, S. (2009). Perspectives on risk management in supply chains.
Journal of Operations Management, 27, 114–118.


Nguyen, T., Li, Z., Spiegler, V., Ieromonachou, P., & Lin, Y. (2018). Big data analytics in
supply chain management: A state-of-the-art literature review. Computers &
Operations Research, 98, 254–264.


Palombarini, J., & Martínez, E. (2012). SmartGantt – An intelligent system for real time
rescheduling based on relational reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with
Applications, 39, 10251–10268.


Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S.
(2017). The role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for
sustainability. Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 1108–1118.


Pavlov, A., Ivanov, D., Pavlov, D., & Slinko, A. (2019). Optimization of network re-
dundancy and contingency planning in sustainable and resilient supply chain re-
source management under conditions of structural dynamics. Annals of Operations
Research.


Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., et al.
(2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 12, 2825–2830.


PrasannaVenkatesan, S., & Goh, M. (2016). Multi-objective supplier selection and order
allocation under disruption risk. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 95, 124–142.


Priore, P., Ponte, B., Puente, J., & Gómez, A. (2018). Learning-based scheduling of flexible
manufacturing systems using ensemble methods. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
126, 282–291.


Rajagopal, V., Venkatesan, S. P., & Goh, M. (2017). Decision-making models for supply
chain risk mitigation: A review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 113, 646–682.


Rajesh, R., & Ravi, V. (2015). Supplier selection in resilient supply chains: A grey rela-
tional analysis approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 86, 343–359.


Rana, N. P., Luthra, S., Mangla, S. K., Islam, R., Roderick, S., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2018).
Barriers to the development of smart cities in Indian context. Information Systems
Frontiers, 1–23.


Ribeiro, M., Grolinger, K., & Capretz, M. A. (2015). MLaaS: Machine learning as a service.
2015 IEEE 14th international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA)
(pp. 896–902).


Rossit, D. A., Tohmé, F., & Frutos, M. (2018). Industry 4.0: Smart scheduling. International
Journal of Production Research, 1–12.


Sawik, T. (2013a). Selection of resilient supply portfolio under disruption risks. Omega,
41, 259–269.


Sawik, T. (2013b). Integrated selection of suppliers and scheduling of customer orders in
the presence of supply chain disruption risks. International Journal of Production
Research, 51, 7006–7022.


Sawik, T. (2016). On the risk-averse optimization of service level in a supply chain under
disruption risks. International Journal of Production Research, 54, 98–113.


Scheibe, K. P., & Blackhurst, J. (2018). Supply chain disruption propagation: A systemic
risk and normal accident theory perspective. International Journal of Production
Research, 56, 43–59.


Shahzad, A., & Mebarki, N. (2012). Data mining based job dispatching using hybrid


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


96



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0215

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.03.018

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.03.018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0480




simulation-optimization approach for shop scheduling problem. Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 25, 1173–1181.


Sharp, M., Ak, R., & Hedberg, T., Jr. (2018). A survey of the advancing use and devel-
opment of machine learning in smart manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing
Systems.


Sheffi, Y., & Rice, J. B., Jr. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 47, 41.


Simchi-Levi, D., Schmidt, W., Wei, Y., Zhang, P. Y., Combs, K., Ge, Y., et al. (2015).
Identifying risks and mitigating disruptions in the automotive supply chain.
Interfaces, 45, 375–390.


Solti, A., Raffel, M., Romagnoli, G., & Mendling, J. (2018). Misplaced product detection
using sensor data without planograms. Decision Support Systems, 112, 76–87.


Stricker, N., Kuhnle, A., Sturm, R., & Friess, S. (2018). Reinforcement learning for
adaptive order dispatching in the semiconductor industry. CIRP Annals.


Strozzi, F., Colicchia, C., Creazza, A., & Noè, C. (2017). Literature review on the ‘Smart
Factory’ concept using bibliometric tools. International Journal of Production Research,
55, 6572–6591.


Tomlin, B. (2006). On the value of mitigation and contingency strategies for managing
supply chain disruption risks. Management Science, 52, 639–657.


Torabi, S., Baghersad, M., & Mansouri, S. (2015). Resilient supplier selection and order
allocation under operational and disruption risks. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 79, 22–48.


Tuncel, E., Zeid, A., & Kamarthi, S. (2014). Solving large scale disassembly line balancing
problem with uncertainty using reinforcement learning. Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, 25, 647–659.


Viswanadham, N., & Samvedi, A. (2013). Supplier selection based on supply chain eco-
system, performance and risk criteria. International Journal of Production Research, 51,
6484–6498.


Vugrin, E. D., Warren, D. E., & Ehlen, M. A. (2011). A resilience assessment framework for
infrastructure and economic systems: Quantitative and qualitative resilience analysis
of petrochemical supply chains to a hurricane. Process Safety Progress, 30, 280–290.


Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J.-f., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017).


Big data analytics and firm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of
Business Research, 70, 356–365.


Wang, J., Yang, J., Zhang, J., Wang, X., & Zhang, W. (2018a). Big data driven cycle time
parallel prediction for production planning in wafer manufacturing. Enterprise
Information Systems, 12, 714–732.


Wang, J., Zhang, J., & Wang, X. (2018b). Bilateral LSTM: A two-dimensional long short-
term memory model with multiply memory units for short-term cycle time fore-
casting in re-entrant manufacturing systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 14, 748–758.


Waschneck, B., Reichstaller, A., Belzner, L., Altenmüller, T., Bauernhansl, T., Knapp, A.,
et al. (2018). Optimization of global production scheduling with deep reinforcement
learning. Procedia CIRP, 72, 1264–1269.


Weber, C. A., & Current, J. R. (1993). A multiobjective approach to vendor selection.
European Journal of Operational Research, 68, 173–184.


Wetzstein, A., Hartmann, E., Benton, W., Jr., & Hohenstein, N.-O. (2016). A systematic
assessment of supplier selection literature—State-of-the-art and future scope.
International Journal of Production Economics, 182, 304–323.


Wieland, A., & Marcus Wallenburg, C. (2013). The influence of relational competencies
on supply chain resilience: A relational view. International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, 43, 300–320.


Wu, D., & Olson, D. L. (2008). Supply chain risk, simulation, and vendor selection.
International Journal of Production Economics, 114, 646–655.


Wuest, T., Weimer, D., Irgens, C., & Thoben, K.-D. (2016). Machine learning in manu-
facturing: Advantages, challenges, and applications. Production & Manufacturing
Research, 4, 23–45.


Yoon, J., Talluri, S., Yildiz, H., & Ho, W. (2018). Models for supplier selection and risk
mitigation: A holistic approach. International Journal of Production Research, 56,
3636–3661.


Yu, J., & Liu, J. (2011). LRProb control chart based on logistic regression for monitoring
mean shifts of auto-correlated manufacturing processes. International Journal of
Production Research, 49, 2301–2326.


I.M. Cavalcante, et al. International Journal of Information Management 49 (2019) 86–97


97



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0268-4012(19)30142-2/sbref0590


