









Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Decision Support Systems


j ourna l homepage: www.e lsev ie r.com/ locate /dss

Improving the peer review process with information technology


Munir Mandviwalla a, Ravi Patnayakuni b, David Schuff a,⁎
a Temple University, United States
b University of Alabama, United States

a r t i c l e i n f o

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: David.Schuff@temple.edu (D. Schu


0167-9236/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2008.04.005

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 5 June 2007
Received in revised form 20 April 2008
Accepted 27 April 2008
Available online 2 May 2008

Peer review is the engine of scholarship where new knowledge is legitimized. Despite
technological advances in publishing and communication, the process of review has not
changed since it became prevalent over 100 years ago. This paper describes how information
technology can be used to improve the peer review process. Taking a combined design science
and natural science approach, we design and test a prototype system based on the principles of
structured communication. Through an exploratory study, we find that our proposed system is
viewed more favorably by both authors and reviewers across several dimensions, including
fairness, convenience, and value.


© 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Peer review
Scholarship
Design science
Process improvement
Prototype

1. Introduction


Information technology has fundamentally changed the
production and dissemination of new knowledge. For
example, in academia knowledge producers (authors) create
manuscripts on sophisticated word processing software,
share drafts and discuss ideas using a variety of communica-
tion tools, and produce print-ready journal copy using desk-
top publishing software. Teams of scientists can share and
work on complex projects in ways that were simply not
possible a few years ago, while authors of textbooks are now
experimenting with electronic delivery mechanisms that will
radically change the distribution model of the publishing
industry.


Despite these technological advances, the process for
evaluating the content of publications remains largely un-
changed. The focus of this paper is peer review, the process by
which new knowledge is legitimized by its acceptance and
dissemination to the wider community. Peer review is often
described as an instance of decision making (e.g., [33]), and as
an example of knowledge production and dissemination. Peer

ff).


All rights reserved.

review is also time consuming and expensive. Editors believe
that the largest “cost” of producing a journal is reviewing and
editing [22]. Weber [34] estimated a reviewing “opportunity
cost” of $24,500 for each published paper in Management
Information Systems Quarterly.


IT has already impacted the peer review process, most
notably in the use of web-based document management tools
that can manage the process of submission, review, and
arriving at an editorial decision. Yet the peer review process
itself is essentially the same as it was since it became
prevalent over 100 years ago [28]. Most information technol-
ogies simply automate the review process (e.g., [9]). The
current peer review process of (often) slow back and forth
deliberation among authors, reviewers, and editors continues
the legacy of an earlier era defined by infrequent, high-cost
communication. Watson [32] argues that though the Internet
has improved some aspects of publishing, most of the changes
are simple and focus on the tasks of publication (“alpha
level”), there has been little to no change to people's roles
(“beta change”) or a restructuring of the underlying system
(“gamma change”).


There is, however, a fundamental dilemma in researching
how to use IT to improve the peer review process. There is no
current literature that fully elaborates the potential problems.
Further, there are no comprehensive behavioral models that



mailto:David.Schuff@temple.edu

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2008.04.005

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01679236




30 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

can explain the impact of proposed IT enabled improvements.
Therefore, we propose that both a design science and natural
(behavioral) science research approach is necessary to build
new utility into the peer review process and understand the
impact of such proposed changes [15,20,31]. Cao et al. [5],
who build on Hevner et al. [15], March and Smith [20], and
Nunamaker et al.'s [24] design science approaches, suggest
that a multi-methodological, cross-paradigm research
approach that combines design and behavioral science will
yield more powerful and insightful results. Research on the
peer review process is at an early stage and very little ag-
gregate knowledge has been accumulated, a combined ap-
proach will therefore improve the chances that important
behaviors are identified early and only the most useful
technical artifacts are built. As Hevner et al. [15] argue,
truth and utility are inseparable and “an artifact may have
utility because of some as yet undiscovered truth. A theory
may yet to be developed to the point where its truth can be
incorporated into design” (p. 80).


The remainder of this paper is structured using a
combined design and natural science approach. First, we
provide perspectives on peer review that illustrate the
importance of the problem and our approach. Second, we
apply the design science perspective to create a process based
model to analyze the traditional peer review process and to
serve as a baseline for changing the process. We propose a
new process based on structured communication and
implemented using a prototype system. Third, and in parallel,
we apply the natural science perspective to develop a set of
behavioral propositions to evaluate changes to the peer
review process. The two perspectives of design and natural
science come together in an exploratory study to evaluate the
impact of the prototype system. In the final sections, the
results of the study are discussed.


2. The role and challenges of peer review


Improving the peer review process is particularly impor-
tant for academic publishing. Worldwide growth in the
number of higher education institutions has led to an increase
in the number of faculty. There is increased pressure on
journals because of the increased volume of material
requiring review. Word processing has reduced the time
cost of resubmitting manuscripts to different outlets. The
result is that there is an increasing burden on the traditional
volunteer model of peer review accompanied by increasing
dissatisfaction with the process. Readers of peer-reviewed
research often complain about lack of quality, sterility of
material, and irrelevance [10], and observers believe that the
traditional peer review process is currently too slow, and
lacking in quality, impartiality, validity, and reliability [2,33].
According to Frost and Taylor [10], there are now questions
about whether the centralized control structure of peer
review and the publication process has led to a lack of
innovation in the conventional outlets for academic scholar-
ship. Journals often become equipped to handle the routine
rather than recognize innovation and diversity [23]. More
generally, at the policy level there have been questions about
the application of peer review in science. For example,
McCarty [21] outlines the experience of The American
Psychologist in which a controversial article was accepted

and then later rejected. The controversy was prominently
played out on Internet newsgroups; the editor attributed
some of the mistakes to the delays inherently built into a
system based on postal mail.


As a reaction to these and other problems, some have
questioned the very concept of peer review. Horrobin [16]
suggests that the peer review concept is fatally flawed
because the people who serve as reviewers are never truly
peers in terms of ability and that the process may inhibit truly
innovative thinking. Bedeian [2] reports that Nobel laureate
Rosalyn Yalow in her acceptance speech noted that “the truly
imaginative are not being judged by their peers. They have
none!” [35].


Others have suggested that although peer review is viable,
various improvements to the process should be considered.
For example, Apt [1] proposes a model in which computer
science can start new, free, high quality journals that are
universally accessible to all on the web and which serve to
increase the number of outlets available. Others have sug-
gested an entrepreneurial approach that advocates radical
changes to knowledge production with ideas such as self-
publishing (“sky writing”) on the web and peer commentary,
where comments are added to the published article after
it has been peer reviewed [14]. Weblogs are the technical
realization of this vision though they remain outside the
realm of academic knowledge production. Bedeian [2]
proposes a number of socially-motivated improvements to
the peer review process including allowing authors to submit
a note to reviewers with their submission, publishing referee
comments, identifying the referees in the publication, rating
review reports, and instituting an appeals process. Brown [4]
proposes improvements to the process of peer review by
advocating the double-blind evaluation process.


In information systems there have been several efforts
to improve peer review. Saunders [27] focuses on how
reviewers and editors can practice “developmental review-
ing” — the idea of providing the author with very detailed and
constructive suggestions for revising the manuscript. Lee [19]
outlines how information technology can be used to dis-
seminate research and speed the review process. Weber [33]
characterizes peer review as an instance of decision making
and proposes improvements that include removing anonym-
ity, and using the web to disseminate both papers under
review and rejected papers along with their associated
reviews. Watson [32] proposes certification and formal
training for reviewers as well as restructuring the relationship
between authors, reviewers, and editors into a “marketplace”
where editors bid for articles based on reviews by accredited
referees and authors evaluate review reports.


Peer review is also being increasingly applied outside
academic publishing. Grant makers, accounting audits, policy
review, software development, and standards review (e.g.,
IEEE) all apply peer review. Patton and Olin [25] provide a
framework for applying peer review to improve regulatory
decisions in response to recent controversies in the United
States Congress about conflicts of interest. Accounting firms
use peer review to evaluate other firms and accountants and
there is discussion of how to improve the peer review process
to make the results more public (e.g., [29]). Increasingly on
the web, user-submitted reviews are used to augment
information provided by the manufacturer or retailer (e.g.,






Fig. 1. The peer review process in context.


31M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

reviews by customers on Amazon.com) and provide recom-
mendations (e.g., TripAdvisor.com).


3. Part A — design science


3.1. Analysis of the peer review process


Peer review has been examined in almost every academic
discipline. Yet, most articles are editorial-style thought pieces
and there are few theoretical or empirical studies that
consider the complete peer review process. Specifically, the
literature does not go far enough in elaborating, demonstrat-
ing, and evaluating how ITcan fundamentally change the peer
review process. Given that most scholars are not ready to
abandon the basic precept of peer review, we assume that
review by peers is a given. However, the process by which the
process is conducted could be improved. In this section, we
build a process-based model of peer review that can identify
and explain the problems and suggest potential IT solutions.


Cummings and Frost [7] characterize academic publishing
as a system of two related functions1. The communication
process focuses on communicating high-quality manuscripts
to readers, screening out lower quality articles, recognizing
good scholarship, and communicating the accomplishments
of a field to insiders and outsiders. The control process
represents managing scarce resources such as available
journal pages, gate keeping in terms of paper selection,
representation, and power differential among actors.


Cummings and Frost's [7] perspective is compatible with
systems thinking. Academic publishing can be seen as a
system in which ideas are communicated and controlled
through processes to produce knowledge. The traditional
peer review process is a type of communication and control
process. The process itself has several components. Submit-
ting includes the act of submitting (and resubmitting) the
manuscript as well as associated activities such as interpret-
ing submission guidelines, fitting the publication to the
guidelines, and logistical challenges in making sure the

1 We use the term process in the remainder of this paper and equate it
with the term function as used by [7].

publication has a reviewable article (e.g., the file is corrupt,
pages are missing, etc.). Reviewing includes the act of re-
viewing and associated activities such as interpreting the
article, selecting reviewers, and dealing with late or inap-
propriate reviews. Finally, deciding includes making the final
editorial decision on the paper as well as associated document
management activities such as keeping track of reviews.


Fig. 1 depicts peer review as a set of processes that convert
ideas into knowledge (published articles), and which are
embedded within the larger academic publishing processes
of communication and control. Key stakeholders such as
authors, reviewers, and editors influence the process. Given
our focus on peer review, we omit other important processes
from Fig. 1 such as journal production (in which accepted
papers are queued and prepared for publication). Submitting,
reviewing, and deciding are presented sequentially only
for illustrative purposes. For example, if an editor rejects a
submission because it is in a foreign language, the reviewing
process is never instantiated, and the decision is made
immediately after submission.


Information technology can support and change the com-
munication and control processes. For example, IT can change
control procedures by making the process for submitting
manuscripts more convenient. More formally, IT can have a
transactional impact [8] by improving the basic control and
communication operations involved in knowledge produc-
tion such as the submission of a manuscript. By allowing
submission at any time and from any place, IT can also have a
geographical and temporal impact. The ability to make manu-
scripts available through the web gives IT the opportunity to
perform a disintermediation role, and by recording revision
marks in manuscripts IT can have a tracking role. IT can thus
both improve and change the communication and control
processes of academic publishing.


Using this model we can place the perceived problems of
traditional peer review in context. For authors, the process of
submitting is often confusing and slow. There is perceived lack
of transparency and accountability regarding the reviewing
process. When the reviews are returned they are often late,
lacking in quality because they did not understand their main
thesis, and may reflect particularistic biases. Authors may feel






32 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

that the process does not add value and that there is pressure
to conform to the reviewer's preferences, which may in turn
lead to homogeneity of ideas and lack of innovation. Editors,
on the other hand, are concerned about the lack of qualified
reviewers, their responsiveness, and of ensuring consistency
among reviews to avoid problems of disagreement among
referees. Editors are also concerned about their reputation
and may prefer to err on the side of caution resulting in
rejection of marginal but potentially innovative articles,
indicating problems in the deciding process. Finally, reviewers
are underappreciated, feel the pressure to provide extremely
detailed “developmental” reviews in the context of submis-
sions that come from increasingly diverse research traditions,
methods, and cultures, and wonder about the value they get
from the process.


It is interesting to note thatmost current attempts to apply
IT to improve the peer review process have focused on
improving the control aspects of the submitting process (e.g.,
web based upload of documents) and the deciding process
(e.g., keeping track of documents and reviews). Few efforts
have focused on changing and trying to improve the actual
reviewing process (the middle box of Fig. 1). Our focus is to
go beyond the traditional automational and control power of
IT and consider ways to transform the entire peer review
process. The model in Fig. 1 provides a baseline view of the
traditional peer review process that can be used to consider
transformational changes.


3.2. Proposed structured communication process and prototype


3.2.1. Structured communication process
Focusing on the communication aspects of the peer review


process may lead to substantial improvements. Communica-
tion, including informal communication, is an important tool
of the scientific process [17,28]. We propose to link the key
stakeholders (authors, referees, and editors) in the complete
cycle of submission, refereeing, editing, presentation, and
discussion using a structured communication process. Cur-
rently, these stakeholders are connected by mediating roles
played by editors. Authors submit articles into a black box and
sometime later an acceptance or rejection emerges.
Reviewers read submissions divorced from context with no
opportunity to engage the author in discussion. Yet, simply
increasing communication without controls or structure is
not a practical solution. Instead, we propose a structured
communication process.


The goal of communication in peer review is to reach an
editorial decision regarding an article. Goal-oriented com-
munication has been extensively studied by philosophers,
psychologists, sociologists, and others. One particularly
relevant strand of work is research on mutual understanding
[13,30] and common grounding [6]. According to Te'eni [30],
goal-oriented communication consists of core content, con-
text, and intention, and occurs within the context of the
communicators' values, norms, and use of resources. The
basic premise is that effective communication requires
building mutual understanding as well as relationships
among the communicators. Yet reaching mutual understand-
ing is very difficult because of differences in the values and
norms of the communicator and in the availability of
contextual information.

In peer review, communication is typically anonymous,
sporadic, and conducted over great distances, cultures, and
even disciplines, and achieving mutual understanding can be
seen as a key factor in reaching the best editorial decision.
Therefore, the challenge (and potential benefit) of improving
communication in the peer review process is significant.
Te'eni [30] integrates the relevant research on improving
communication using information technology and proposes a
set of design guidelines focusing on improving mutual
understanding. Discussion forums (or bulletin boards) are
well known technological tools that are widely used in
industry for many different tasks. The structure afforded by
the discussion forum design artifact can improve commu-
nication and mutual understanding during the review
process. We next describe the proposed structured commu-
nication review process using the model from Fig. 1. The
proposal includes changes to the overall review process per
the model in Fig. 1, and changes to the communication
processes as afforded by the discussion forum. The key design
attributes are summarized by applying Te'eni's guidelines for
designing goal-oriented communication support systems in
Table 1.


3.2.1.1. Submission. The traditional paper-based reviewing
process typically only allows for a single opportunity to
submit an article before it is passed through the reviewing
cycle. While there are advantages to limiting authors to one
complete submission/review/decision process, the use of IT
can enhance communication between reviewers and authors
so that authors can respond to questions from reviewers and
editors between cycles of formal review. In the proposed
structured communication process, all submissions are
electronic and authors and reviewers interact with each
other through an online discussion forum. Authors are
allowed to submit additional material pertaining to the
submission in response to the reviewers' questions (see
below).


3.2.1.2. Reviewing
3.2.1.2.1. First stage. The reviewer is asked for a “pre-


liminary decision” regarding the manuscript and is encour-
aged to ask specific questions in the online forum. The review
is then made available to other reviewers and authors for
discussion and comment during a specified open window
of time. During the open time window, authors and re-
viewers interact with each other and respond to ques-
tions and comments, clarify issues, provide additional
information, and present arguments. The editors moderate
the discussion.


3.2.1.2.2. Second stage. When the open time window is
completed, the discussion forum is closed to authors.
Reviewers are informed that the discussion is closing and
are asked to provide their final decision on the article after
examining all interactions. All other aspects of the review
process remain the same, including protecting the anonymity
of the authors and reviewers.


3.2.1.3. Deciding. When the open timeperiod is complete, the
editor(s) make the final decision using the original reviews
and the subsequent interaction in the discussion forum. The
major change is that editors now have the interaction on the






Table 1
Key design attributes of proposed structured communication process


Design guidelines (Te'eni [30]) Design attributes
of proposed system


Role within the peer review process


Design must simultaneously consider enhancing
mutual understanding and promoting relationships
between communicators


Common space The discussion forum provides a common space in which all authors and
reviewers can see comments and responses. This common space can
foster a sense of community and mutual trust since all content is
available to all and all users can add to or start new conversations.
Anonymity promotes interaction without fear of reprisal


Design should support adaptive behavior,
including the contingent use of alternative
communication strategies, alternative message
forms, and alternative media


Interactive and parallel Authors and reviewers can adjust the contextual information needed to
understand reviews and articles by asking and responding to more (or
less) questions, or by ignoring irrelevant questions and responses. The
“preliminary decision” process encourages adaptive behavior by
allowing reviewers to change their decision based on additional
information. The forum also makes it easy to manage and sustain
multiple parallel conversations


Design should monitor complexity and alert
communicators to a high propensity of
communication breakdowns


Editable structure Discussion forums allow administrators (editors) to remove irrelevant
posts and reorganize the posts so that they make more sense. Editors
can easily see a communication breakdown by monitoring number of
posts and responses and intervene if necessary. We added the artificial
constraint of an “open time window for comments” to further limit
complexity (see more below)


Design should support multiple levels of
communication and easy travel between levels


Hierarchical Topics (papers) and responses (reviews and questions) are organized
around a hierarchical “threaded” structure that makes it easy to navigate
between main content (the paper and reviews) and contextual
information. A follow-up comment is automatically and visually tied to
the original comment


Organizational memory should consist of speech act
components, situations, norms, and values


Stored All comments remain on the discussion forum so that authors and
reviewers and editors can later refer to previous comments


Organizational memory should consist of associative
information, accessible through multiple
media, and represented in multiple forms,
allowing for indeterminate and emergent views as well


Citation The ability to cite conversations and postings from different threads can
lead to new and emergent discussions (e.g., a reviewer may cross cite a
posting by another reviewer)


33M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

forum, as well as the article and reviews per the traditional
model, on which to base their decision. When a final editorial
decision has been made, the authors (and reviewers) are
informed and are again allowed to view the discussion forum.


3.2.2. Prototype implementation
To implement the structured communication process into


a system, we created a secure web site following the
discussion forum metaphor (see Fig. 2). The web site was
created using Microsoft FrontPage and consisted of a series of
Active Server Pages (ASP). The prototype went through
several iterations to improve usability and performance for
application in a live setting. One of the authors was the
principal designer; while the editors involved in the explora-
tory study (see below) acted as testers.


The prototype implements the proposed structured
communication process by (a) changes to the basic review
process (e.g., the “open time window”) and (b) the dis-
cussion forum design artifact. The prototype provides a
common space, supports interactive and parallel conversa-
tions, affords a hierarchical (and editable) visual structure,
and allows cross referencing through citations and by
storing all the conversations (see Table 1). We were unable
to implement all the Te'eni (2006) guidelines. For example,
the hierarchical structure of a discussion forum can also
reduce adaptive behavior since there is only one way to see
and use the forum, there are no automatic tools to provide
communication breakdown alerts, and our implementation
did not distinguish between different forms of commu-
nicative acts.

4. Part B — natural science


4.1. Evaluating the new peer review process


In this section, we propose a set of propositions to un-
derstand and evaluate the impact of the proposed peer review
process improvements. Novel “system building” research
projects often evaluate well-known concepts such as ease of
use and satisfaction. These concepts, though important, do
not fully explain the underlying reasons why a proposed
system is used or not used. Understanding this is critical when
the proposed system is exploratory, can bemodified relatively
easily, and the resulting usage patterns and behaviors are not
fully understood. We developed the prototype in an iterative
manner using real-world constraints while available theory
and previous research provided guidance for the design
choices. In other words, the “natural science” aspect reported
in this section was developed in parallel with the “design
science” aspect, and in an iterative manner. We found the
following three perspectives to be useful in thinking about
peer review.


4.1.1. The rational actor perspective
Frost and Taylor [10] provide an in-depth analysis of


the peer review process from the editor's perspective. They
suggest that the decision to accept or reject a manuscript may
in the end be largely organizational and based on how well
standard operating procedures, policies, and issues such as
space, turnaround time, quality, number of submissions, and
others are managed. Another aspect of the review process is






Fig. 2. Prototype refereeing system.


34 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

the overall convenience of the process. These are largely
independent concepts. For example, a process could honor
deadlines and commitments but still seem inconvenient to
authors and reviewers. Alternatively, the process could seem
very convenient to authors and reviewers in terms of
submission but suffer from poor management once the
paper has been submitted. Any reasonably well-implemented
IT based peer review process should improve management
and convenience (e.g., it is easier to upload a file then to print
out andmail it, and it is easier to collate reviews electronically
than on disparate pieces of paper). This is a basic “automa-
tional” power of IT. This leads to our first set of propositions:


P1a: The structured communication process will im-
prove the perception of how well the peer review
process is managed as compared to the traditional
reviewing process.


P1b: The structured communication process will
improve perceptions about the convenience of the
peer review process as compared to the traditional
reviewing process.


In a study of how the Academy of Management Journal
accepts and rejects articles, Beyer et al. [3] found that gate
keeping – the use of normative rationalistic rules such as
originality, clarity, sophisticated statistics and extensive
documentation. In another study, Gilliland and Cortina [12]
analyzed the underlying reasons for low inter-rater reliability
of reviewers and found that reviewers agree on the basic
criteria but apply them differently. The results of Beyer et al.
[3] and Gilliland and Cortina [12] suggest that basic under-
standability (or lack) of a manuscript or of the review of the

manuscript can also impact perceptions of the peer review
process and the resulting decision.


In the proposed IT-enabled process, authors can easily
obtain submission guidelines and other instructions.
Reviewers can search and annotate articles. In addition,
reviewers and authors can interact directly with each other.
Other review reports are available to provide examples and
provide insight for additional analysis and questioning. In
summary, all of these opportunities to improve understand-
ing suggest that:


P2: The structured communication process will im-
prove perceptions about the understandability of
articles, reviews, and reviewing process as com-
pared to the traditional reviewing process.


4.1.2. Justice and fairness
Pfeffer et al. [26] analyzed the decision-making aspect


of the peer review process and compared universalistic
criteria – consistent, organizationally held norms (such as
merit), with particularistic criteria – individually held
criteria (such as race or social connections). Decision-
making follows universalistic standards when the standards
are established and well-understood. Less developed dis-
ciplines will face more uncertainty with regards to uni-
versally held criteria and may default to particularism,
which can impact perceptions of fairness. They found that
particularism was more evident in the social sciences than
natural sciences. Beyer et al. [3] also argue that “low-level”
paradigm fields such as management will lead to higher
particularistic decisions because these fields have no uni-
versally held criteria.






35M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

Gilliland and Beckstein [11] apply “organizational justice
theory” to peer review and distinguish between the perceived
justice of decision outcomes – termed “distributive justice” –
from the justice of the decision processes – termed “proce-
dural justice.” They argue that the peer review process is
similar to organizational decisions such as performance
appraisal and personnel selection, and can be seen as an
assessment of the author's research performance. Specifically,
the process of editorial decision making can be assessed in
terms of perceptions of procedural justice, while perceptions
about the fairness or justice of the actual outcome (accep-
tance or rejection) can be assessed in terms of distributive
justice. In their study, they found that concepts of justice and
fairness were important in predicting reactions and author
intentions to submit further work to the journal. Procedural
justice was operationalized as (a) external consistency (how
authors are treated as compared with other authors) and
internal consistency (how the different reviews impact the
decision to accept or reject), (b) perceptions of whether
reviewers avoid personal bias in their decisions, (c) the
timeliness of the feedback, (d) the explanation or justification
provided for the decisions, and (e) the sensitivity with which
the decision is conveyed to the authors.


To evaluate the impact of our proposed improvements on
the notion of “fairness” in the peer review process we must
consider the perspectives of the authors, reviewers, and
editors. For example, authors are likely to care about
consistency (point (a) above) between a decision and the
reviews, while reviewers are likely to be more concerned
about being consistent with other reviewers regardless of the
outcome. Therefore, we propose that the fairness of the
review process is characterized by several factors, including
impartiality (consistency and bias avoidance) and account-
ability (tone and conduct of the process). Authors, reviewers,
and editors are typically all interested in the overall fairness of
the peer review process regardless of the specific reasons
behind perceptions of fairness.


The structured IT-enabled peer review process is trans-
parent — authors know that all reviews are “public” and that
they can be seen by the other stakeholders. In addition, there
is open interaction between reviewers and authors through
the discussion forum. Authors (and reviewers) also know that
they can question the initial reviews and provide additional
information to support their position. Reviewers can also see
the other reviews on the discussion forum. Therefore, we
propose that:


P3: The structured communication process will im-
prove perceptions of fairness as compared to the
traditional reviewing process.


Timeliness (point (c) above) encompasses a variety of
process-related characteristics, including the speed of the
submission process, the time a manuscript spends in review,
responsiveness to questions about the process, and the
timeliness of subsequent publication. We believe that these
dimensions are implied by the more general concepts of
management and convenience (as described in the previous
section). Similarly, the concept of “explanation and justifica-
tion” (point (d) above) was folded into the more general
concept of understandability (also described in the previous

section), which includes the explanation or understandability
of the submission guidelines, the submitted manuscript,
reviews, and publication guidelines.


4.1.3. Knowledge production
Laband [18] takes an economic perspective, characterizing


scholarship and peer review as a knowledge production
functionwith key inputs from authors, editors, and reviewers.
He examined editorial correspondence and measured article
and review quality by looking at items such as review length,
citations, and time taken to revise. The basic thesis of the
research was that reviewers and editors not only screen
articles but also add value in the knowledge production
process. Laband found that although editors' comments did
not significantly increase manuscript quality, reviewer feed-
back does seem to add value by contributing to knowledge
production (in addition to their role as screeners). Laband's
work suggests that the concept of value may also impact
perceptions about the peer review process. A process that
provides detailed reviews that reveal new directions and
insights may not only be perceived as fair and well-managed,
but will also be perceived as adding value to the process
overall. Conversely, it seems feasible that even if a process is
perceived as being unfair and badly managed, authors could
still see it as valuable if the reviews were useful and the
process, however poor, resulted in new insights.


Laband's perspective also makes it clear that adding value
(e.g., useful comments from the reviewers) has a cost in terms
of effort. This is an important consideration given that most
peer review processes are based on the volunteer model.
Therefore, value is operationalized by both perceptions about
the insights gained and also by the amount of effort required
to provide and receive that insight. For authors, this would
mean an assessment of the reviews and the effort required to
understand and receive them. For reviewers, it is an
assessment of the value the insight and knowledge gained
by reading the manuscript, and of the value of being involved
in the review process.


In the structured IT-enabled peer review process, authors
have the opportunity to gain direct feedback and clarifications
from reviewers through the discussion forum. Reviewers can
see other reviews and also question authors about topics of
interest or to clarify points through the discussion forum.
These opportunities for interaction may yield more accurate
and substantive reviews and reduce the effort required
to produce quality reviews. This leads to the following
proposition:


P4: The structured communication process will im-
prove perceptions about value as compared to the
traditional reviewing process.


Laband's research and others (e.g., [6]) also focus on qu-
ality of the article as an important end function of the peer
review process. There are several aspects of “quality” in this
context – the submitted manuscript, the peer review process,
and the final manuscript. Direct perceptions about the quality
of the peer review process itself are likely to be accounted for
through other factors: fairness, understanding, value, and
management. However, perceptions about whether changes
to the peer review process improved the actual quality of an






Table 2
Author ratings


Concept and Items Mean (sd)
traditional system


Mean (sd) structured
communication system


Understandability
Understandability of
submission guidelines


1.83 (0.71) 1.77 (0.75)


Understandability of reviews 2.67 (0.84) 2.05 (0.80)
Understandability of the
publication guidelines


2.06 (0.44) 2.00 (0.55)


Convenience
Convenience of submission
and review process


1.83 (0.71) 1.41 (0.59)


Convenience of the
publication process


2.67 (0.84) 1.95 (0.97)


Management
Timeliness of the submission
and review process


2.61 (1.14) 1.36 (0.49)


Timeliness of the publication
process


2.27 (1.03) 1.62 (0.74)


Responsiveness 2.67 (1.14) 1.50 (0.80)


Fairness
Impartiality 2.18 (0.88) 1.91 (0.68)
Accountability 2.77 (1.01) 1.71 (0.78)


Value
Feedback 2.81 (1.05) 2.09 (0.68)
Amount of effort required 2.14 (0.53) 2.35 (0.74)


Scale: 1 = “Excellent”, 5 = “Very Poor.


36 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

article are important in evaluating the proposed improve-
ments. Finally, consistent with other IT enabled process
improvement research, it would be important to understand
the level of overall satisfaction with the process. Positive
perceptions about fairness, understanding, value, and man-
agement should result in higher overall satisfaction. To
summarize:


P5: The structured communication process will im-
prove perceptions about the peer review process in
terms of its impact on the quality of the article
when compared to the traditional reviewing
process.


P6: The structured communication process will im-
prove perceptions about overall satisfaction as
compared to the traditional reviewing process.


Together, our seven propositions represent a simplistic
additive behavioral model of the peer review process. In
reality, the relationships among the constructs may be more
complex. Further, the outcome of the editorial decision may
influence the perceptions of the process itself (authorsmay be
more likely to see a process as fair when the result is in their
favor, regardless of the process details). Given the exploratory
nature of this work, we decided to stay with a simple and
parsimonious set of propositions. Empirical testing and
application will hopefully, over time, build a more sophisti-
cated behavioral picture of the peer review process.


4.2. Exploratory study


An exploratory study was conducted to evaluate the pro-
posed structured communication process. Two mini-tracks at
the Association of Information Systems (AIS) annual Americas
conference participated in the study. There were a total of 28
submissions, 47 authors, 25 reviewers, and five editors. One of
the authors was co-cha for both tracks and acted as the
“managing editor.” All submissions were sent by electronic
mail to the managing editor. The authors and reviewers were
then sent an explanation of the refereeing process. All reviews
were posted to the prototype system to which each reviewer
and author had secure but anonymous access (see Fig. 2).
The peer review process was divided into two stages. Each
reviewer was initially asked for a “preliminary decision” on
the article and encouraged to ask specific questions. The
review site was then made available to reviewers and authors
for discussion and comment during the one-week time
window. All identification information was removed and
the process was double-blind. After the open time period
the site was restricted to reviewers, whowere asked to look at
all the comments and reviews and make a final decision. The
site was then restricted to the track chairs, who analyzed all
the comments and made final decisions for each article. A
web-based questionnaire consistent with our propositions
was administered to all participants. To gain comparative
data, each participant was asked to rate their experience with
the prototype system and with their most recent experience
with the traditional refereeing process (excluding outlets that
had a web-based reviewing system) on the dimensions of
understandability, convenience, management, fairness, and
value. Each dimension was comprised of two or three survey

items accompanied by a brief, specific description of what
should be evaluated (for example, “Responsiveness,” an as-
pect of the Management dimension, was described as “kept
informed of status, quick acknowledgement”). Respondents
were asked to rate each item from 1 (“Excellent”) to 5 (“Very
Poor”). We also asked participants several open-ended
questions about the future impact of the structured commu-
nication process.


The study had a total of 36 sample points consisting of 22
authors and 19 reviewers (note: some authors were also
reviewers). Participation levels among respondents varied.
While one respondent frequented the review site once a day,
63% of the respondents visited the site once a week. On
average, participants read four abstracts or papers (excluding
their own) and eight additional reviews (excluding their
own). Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for authors and
Table 3 for reviewers.


5. Discussion


The results of the exploratory study are encouraging with
respect to our basic thesis that adding IT-enabled structured
communication can provide benefits. The prototype system
was rated more positively by authors on at least one aspect of
understandability, convenience, management, fairness, and
value. For reviewers, the perceived improvements were not as
strong – only one measure of management (responsiveness)
and one measure of fairness (impartiality) was rated more
highly for the prototype system. The remainder of this section
discusses the results across the five dimensions measured in
this study in greater detail.






Table 3
Reviewer ratings


Concept and Items Mean (sd)
traditional system


Mean (sd) structured
communication system


Understandability
Understandability of
submission guidelines


2.46 (0.97) 1.92 (0.64)


Understandability of the
publication guidelines


2.00 (0.91) 2.23 (0.72)


Convenience
Convenience of submission
and review process


2.00 (0.95) 1.62 (0.77)


Management
Timeliness of the submission
and review process


1.92 (0.86) 1.54 (0.52)


Responsiveness 2.54 (1.39) 1.69 (0.63)


Fairness
Impartiality 2.17 (0.83) 1.83 (0.72)
Accountability 2.17 (1.03) 1.92 (0.49)


Value
Feedback 2.46 (0.97) 2.23 (0.60)
Amount of effort required 2.08 (0.69) 2.00 (0.82)


Scale: 1 = “Excellent”, 5 = “Very Poor.


37M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

5.1. Understandability


The prototype system does not appear to improve the
understandability of the guidelines of the review process, but it
does seem to improve the understandability of the reviews
for authors. This is plausible given that while the process of
understanding reviews leverages the interactive nature of the
prototype system, communicating guidelines is essentially one-
way communication from editor to author. In their open-ended
comments regarding understandability, participants remarked:


• It may help clarify misunderstandings, give the author a
chance to explain his side of the story, and get follow-up
help from the reviewer (e.g., specific references).


• It allows the quick resolution of misconceptions &
misunderstandings


• Major points can be clarified.
• My concern is that people will get busy and not fulfill the
goal of increasing interaction


The results above suggest that the structured communica-
tion process (supported by the common space, interactive,
parallel, hierarchical, stored, and citation design attributes of
the discussion forum) can increase interactivity, leading to
increased understanding. Yet, this innovationwill only work if
the authors and reviewers cooperate. One reviewer remarked:


The lack of a response to my response made me decide
not to give authors the benefit of the doubt. So instead of
recommending accept with revision, I felt more confident
about recommending reject.


5.2. Convenience


The authors also rated the prototype system as more
convenient than the traditional peer-review system, but

reviewers did not. This may reflect the authors' greater
investment in the process and their positive response to the
availability of more information regarding their submission
(and the relative ease of navigation afforded by the hierarch-
ical design attribute of a discussion forum). For reviewers,
they are required to provide a greater level of information
than they would under the traditional model of peer review.
This may mitigate their positive perceptions of the process. In
fact, one may find it surprising that reviewers did not rate the
prototype system lowerwith regard to convenience given the
“unpolished” interface of our prototype system (for example,
the system lacked online help and error recovery). We believe
the strength of the new review process resulted in the system
being rated relatively highly.


It is reasonable to assume future peer review systems will
be better-designed and include convenience features that
users expect (e.g., automatic password reset and an improved
user interface). These improved systems should result in even
higher convenience ratings by authors and at least no less
convenient by reviewers. However, it would be unwise to
assume that better technology will necessarily lead to better
results. One participant remarked:


Should also provide paper copies and away to get feedback
in other than web-based because it was inconvenient to
have to be tied to my terminal while working on this….


5.3. Management


Authors also rated the prototype system higher than the
traditional peer review model with regard to management.
Specifically, authors rated the timeliness of the submission,
review, and publication process more highly. Again, this may
reflect authors' higher level of investment in the process – the
authors spend most of their time waiting during the peer
review process, and therefore are more likely to notice
improvement. Both authors and reviewers rated responsive-
ness (a measure of management) more highly for the
prototype system.


5.4. Fairness


Impartiality (an aspect of fairness) was rated more highly
by both authors and reviewers. Authors (but not reviewers)
also rated the prototype system highly with regard to
accountability. Perhaps this is the most valuable aspect of IT
enablement – authors and reviewers believe the structured
communication offered by the system helps arrive at a “fair”
assessment of the submission (supported by the common
space, stored, and citation design attributes of the discussion
forum). However, accountability is already inherent in
many review processes and is not aided as clearly by the
technology.


We also asked participants an open-ended question about
why they looked at reviews other than their own to gain
further insight into the fairness concept. One participant
commented that they looked at other reviews “To find out
about other possible papers …, and also to find out more
about the refereeing process as it applied to other papers.”
Another participant more directly stated: “To compare
assessments.” These comments do suggest that at least






38 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

some participants will actively assess the fairness of the
process if given the opportunity to do so.


5.5. Value


Authors also rated value more highly for the proposed
peer review process, while reviewers did not. Specifically,
authors rated feedback highly, once again reflecting the
greater investment authors have in receiving quality feedback
regarding their work. There does not seem to be much
difference with regard to effort for either authors or
reviewers. This indicates a potential downside of structured
communication – in order to provide a richer experience,
more work is required on the part of the authors and
reviewers. The open-ended question regarding why partici-
pants looked at other papers and reviews also provided
additional interesting insights. Curiosity was a common
reason, however, the respondents also remarked:


• Titles seemed interesting and related to my current re-
search interests


• Skimmed through to find those of interest.
• get a sense of how to target the presentation
• Curious about seeing what other reviewers comments
looked like.


• I was looking to see how others viewed papers which I had
commented on. Mostly to see if I was off-base.


• I enjoyed being able to read other people's entries and the
associated comments. I wanted to affiliate with the other
submissions.


• I read them to verify my perceptions. I can be in error. If I
find a mismatch betweenmy perception and the comments
of others I may go back and reread which may or may not
cause a change in my position on the review.


These comments suggest that there are more dimen-
sions of value and perceptions about increasing the overall
quality of scholarship than we had originally conceptua-
lized. Specifically, the participants seem willing and inter-
ested in learning from the experience and adjusting their
work accordingly. We suggest incorporating the concept of
learning in the practice of reviewing and in future studies.
Perhaps the greatest potential benefit of incorporating
structured communication into the review process is that
can become less of a control mechanism and more of a
learning tool. Note that this particular insight follows
directly from our combined design and natural science
approach. The importance of learning would have been less
obvious in the absence of a real design artifact to which
users could react, and it might have become confounded
with other issues if we had not delineated a baseline set of
behavioral concepts.


In contrast with the above, when commenting on the
impact of the new process in increasing the quality of
scholarship, one respondent said that the changes were
positive in terms of the “ability to react to comments (can lead
to dialog about issues/questions). However, the effort is
possibly increased?” One way to understand the lack of
positive ratings for the reviewer group is that the benefit of
increased learning and increased accuracy for reviewers may
not be significant enough to offset the time cost.

5.6. Limitations


There are several limitations in our study. First, the
objectives and motivations of the various stakeholders will
likely vary with the type of outlet. The difference in ratings
might have been greater if this systemwas used for a journal's
review process rather than a conference. Second, the study is
exploratory and should be followed up with a more rigorous
experiment. The prototype also had several technical limita-
tions; for example, the web-based user interface could be
improved. However, as outlined below, the overall research
did yield new and interesting insights.


6. Implications for future research and design


6.1. Improving the peer review process with IT


A discussion forum is an effective design artifact for
promoting mutual understanding among authors and
reviewers, resulting in a better evaluation of scholarly work.
However, our results suggest that discussion forums cannot
by themselves increase interaction and they do not support
other process improvements that are likely needed to
increase interaction such as reminders or ratings. Future
design research should consider combining a discussion
forum with a “document workflow” concept that visually
depicts the flow of documents through the peer review
process and provides embedded discussion forums as needed.
The specific attributes of this combined discussion forum and
workflow design artifact could include.


• Automatic notification of new responses so the participants
do not have to continually login and check for a response.


• Providing automatic updates to authors, reviewers, and
editors when milestone events occur such as the assign-
ment of an editor, assignment of reviewers, and the sub-
mission of a review.


• Setting expectations up front about the level of interactivity
required from authors and reviewers.


• Educating the participants on the benefits of the structured
communication approach. It is unclear if all the reviewers
completely understood the potential benefits of the
approach.


• Allowing authors and editors to rate reviews and making
the results public.


The Te'eni [30] design guidelines were very useful in
thinking about improving goal oriented communication.
However, the guidelines are difficult to apply uniformly and
consistently. Even though comprehensive application is not
the authors stated intention, the lack of constraints can cause
pitfalls. For example, one guideline recommends providing
alternate communication strategies whereas another guide-
line advocates enhancing mutual understanding. Applied
blindly, these two suggestions could lead to contradictory
outcomes. Too many different communication strategies
could end up inhibiting the achievement of mutual under-
standing! We found that the constraints and affordances of
specific design metaphors such as “discussion forum” or
“document workflow” were helpful in thinking about how to
apply IT to peer review. Future design science researchers






39M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

may want to consider going beyond design propositions (or
guidelines) and suggesting specific design metaphors. These
metaphors serve to bind the guidelines together and bring
inherent constraints and affordances.


6.2. Increasing our understanding of peer review


The results indicate that the peer review process for
authors can be improved comprehensively with IT. However,
reviewers are skeptical of changes that will further increase
their workload even though they tend to believe that the
structured communication process can increase quality and
perceptions of fairness. The concept of value holds the most
promise for increasing our understanding of how reviewers
approach peer review. Future studies need to measure value
more precisely and include learning as a concept (as discussed
previously). However, evenwith the limited understanding of
value as provided by this study it is clear that approaches that
increase the burden on reviewers, such as “developmental
reviewing,” will only be embraced by the most diligent and
are unlikely to succeed in the long run. We also suspect
radical ideas are needed that go beyond traditional thinking.
As Watson [32] suggested we need “gamma change” ideas
such as his notion of formal certification for reviewers, a
“scrip” system in which reviewers are obligated to review a
certain number of articles in return for each submission, or
even paying reviewers.


7. Conclusions


This paper analyzes the basic processes of peer review and
proposed changes to the review process using an IT enabled
structured communication approach. We investigated the
problem from both a design science perspective through the
development of a prototype system, and a natural science
perspective by integrating previous literature into behavioral
propositions that guided the evaluation of the prototype. An
exploratory study provided further insights on the prototype
system and on the underlying design and behaviors. This
paper contributes to the literature at three different levels:


• From the design science perspective we prototype and
demonstrate how structured communication can improve
the peer review process by employing artifacts that increase
mutual understanding. An evaluation of the prototype sug-
gests that future design research should consider inte-
grating the design concepts of “discussion forums” and
“workflow” to peer review. Newer design concepts also
need to consider reviewer motivation and look for new and
easier ways to engage reviewers. We believe our work is
one of the first to consider and demonstrate how changing
the process of review can lead to improvements.


• From the natural science perspective, we show how the
theoretical perspectives of procedural justice, the rational
actor, and economic value are important to understand peer
review. These perspectives can also be applied to other
forms of peer review such as product reviews on the web or
audits of accounting practices. Procedural justice speaks to
concerns of fairness that will likely always exist in any
process that involves evaluation of one group by another.
The rational actor perspective provides insights into the

administrative aspects of any kind of review, and the
economic perspective provides insights on why people
choose certain behaviors. The combination of these per-
spectives into propositions is the first step toward devel-
oping a comprehensive behavioral theory of peer review.
The evaluation of the prototype provided additional in-
sights including expanding the conception of value, adding
learning as a concept, and suggesting refinements to the
initial set of concepts.


• This paper also contributes to implementing and refining
design science methodology. In line with suggestions from
the literature [5,15,31] we extend the application of the
design science perspective by combining it with the natural
science perspective. Rather than settle for traditional
benchmark style measures such as ease of use or perfor-
mance, we developed behavioral theoretical propositions in
conjunction with prototype development. The process of
developing the prototype and in parallel, considering eval-
uation measures and theoretical approaches allowed us to
converge on what we believe are key design artifacts (e.g.,
structured communication, workflow) and behaviors (e.g.,
fairness, value, learning) that might have been ignored by
traditional approaches. The propositions provide a sub-
stantive basis for evaluating current and future systems,
and a specific direction for future research. To summarize,
the combined approach is powerful because it generates
new insights and lends more credibility to the results by
anchoring design to behavioral issues of truth and relevance
and anchoring behaviors to design issues of utility and
feasibility.


The structured communication process proposed in this
paper is relatively easy to implement, and we encourage
editors of conferences and journals to continue the process of
experimentation. Moreover, given that review is, at its core, a
process, we believe that future IS research can continue to add
significant value to this very important aspect of academic
scholarship as it is increasingly applied to other domains.


Acknowledgements


Thanks to Rick Watson, Simha Magal, and Blake Ives who
were the co-mini track editors of the conference in which we
tried out the peer review process. Thanks also to Lorne
Olfman, Rick Watson, Blake Ives who reviewed previous
drafts of this paper. Michael Carey, Zaheeruddin Asif, Cindy
Marselis, Don Canuso, Laurel Miller, Deepika Gandhi, and
Guoliang Hong also worked on the Temple Peer Review
Manager system.

References

[1] K.R. Apt, One more revolution to make: free scientific publishing,
Communications of the ACM 44 (5) (2001) 25–28.


[2] A.G. Bedeian, Peer Review and the Social Construction of Knowledge
in the Management Discipline, Academy of Management Learning &
Education 3(2) 198-216.


[3] J.M. Beyer, R.G. Chanove, W.B. Fox, The review process and the fates of
manuscripts submitted to AMJ, Academy of Management Journal 38 (5)
(1995) 1219–1261.


[4] R. Brown, The use of double anonymity in peer review: a decisionwhose
time has come? Quality Assurance 11 (2-4) (2005) 103–109.






40 M. Mandviwalla et al. / Decision Support Systems 46 (2008) 29–40

[5] J. Cao, J.M. Crews, M. Lin, A. Deokar, J.K. Burgoon, J.F. Nunamaker,
Interactions between system evaluation and theory testing: a demon-
stration of the power of a multifaceted approach to information systems
research, Journal of Management Information Systems 22 (4) (2006)
207–235.


[6] H.H. Clark, S.E. Brennan, Grounding in communication, in: L.B. Resnick, J.
Levine, S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition,
American Psychological Association, Washington, DC,1991, pp.127–149.


[7] L.L. Cummings, P.J. Frost (Eds.), Publishing in theOrganizational Sciences,
2nd Edition, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, California, 1995.


[8] T.H. Davenport, J.E. Short, The new industrial engineering: Information
technology and business process redesign, Sloan Management Review
31 (4) (1990) 11–27.


[9] P.V. Dressendorfer, Transition to Web-based peer review process for the
transactions on nuclear science, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 51
(1) (2004) 233.


[10] P.J. Frost, R.N. Taylor, Partisan Perspective: a multiple-level inter-
pretation of the manuscript review process in social science journals,
in: L.L. Cummings, P.J. Frost (Eds.), Publishing in the Organizational
Sciences, 2nd Edition, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, California,
1995, pp. 13–43.


[11] S. Gilliland, B. Beckstein, Procedural and distributive justice in the
editorial review process, Personnel Psychology 49 (3) (1996) 669–691.


[12] S. Gilliland, J. Cortina, Reviewer and editor decision making in the
journal review process, Personnel Psychology 50 (1997) 427–452.


[13] J. Habermas, Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action (C.
Lenhardt and S. W. Nicholsen, Trans.), MIT Press, Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts, 1990.


[14] S. Harnad, M. Hemus, All-or-none: no stable hybrid or half-way
solutions for launching the learned periodical literature into the post
Gutenberg galaxy, in: I. Butterworth (Ed.), The Impact of Electronic
Publishing on the Academic Community, Portland Press, London, 1997,
pp. 18–27.


[15] A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, S. Ram, Design science in information
systems research, MIS Quarterly 28 (1) (2004) 77–105.


[16] E.T. Horrobin, Peer review: a philosophically faulty concept which is
proving disastrous for science, in: S. Harnad (Ed.), Peer commentary on
peer review: A case study in scientific control, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1982, pp. 33–34.


[17] R. Kraut, J. Galegher, C. Egido, Relationships and tasks in scientific
research collaborations, in: I. Greif (Ed.), Computer Supported Coo-
perative Work: A Book of Readings, Morgan Kauffman, California, 1988,
pp. 741–769.


[18] D.N. Laband, Is there value-added from the review in economics?
Preliminary evidence from authors, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
105 (2) (1990) 341–352.


[19] A. Lee, Editor's comments, Management Information Systems Quarterly
23 (4) (1999) lv–lx.


[20] S.T. March, G. Smith, Design and natural science research on informa-
tion technology, Decision Support Systems 15 (4) (1995) 251–266.


[21] R. McCarty, Science, politics, and peer review, American Psychologist
57 (3) (2002) 198.


[22] S. Minton, M.P. Wellman, JAIR at five, AI Magazine 20 (2) (1999) 83–91.
[23] W.R. Nord, Looking at ourselves as we look at others: an exploration


of the publication system for organizational research, in: L.L. Cummings,
P.J. Frost (Eds.), Publishing in the Organizational Sciences, 2nd Edition,
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, California, 1995, pp. 64–78.


[24] J. Nunamaker, M. Chen, T.D.M. Purdin, Systems Development in
information systems research, Journal of Management Information
Systems 7 (3) (1991) 89–106.


[25] D. Patton, S. Olin, Scientific peer review to inform regulatory decision
making: leadership responsibilities and cautions, Risk Analysis 26 (1)
(2006) 5–16.


[26] J. Pfeffer, A. Leong, K. Strehl, Paradigm development and particularism:
journal publication in three scientific disciplines, Social Forces 55 (4)
(1977) 938–951.

[27] C. Saunders, From the trenches: thoughts on developmental reviewing,
MIS Quarterly 29 (2) (2005) iii–xii.


[28] A. Schaffner, The future of scientific journals: lessons from the past,
Information Technology and Libraries 13 (4) (1994) 239–248.


[29] A. Snyder, Increasing transparency in peer review: members speak out,
Journal of Accountancy 198 (6) (2004) 22–23.


[30] D. Te'eni, The language-action perspective as a basis for communication
support systems, Communications of the ACM 49(5) 65-70.


[31] J. Walls, G.Widmeyer, O. El Sawy, Building an information system design
theory for vigilant EIS, Information Systems Research 3 (1) (1992)
36–59.


[32] R. Watson, The academic publication systems: A time for redesign,
University of Georgia, Working Paper, 2006.


[33] R. Weber, The journal review process: a manifesto for change,
Communications of the Association for Information Systems 2(12)2-22.


[34] R. Weber, Retrospection: the MIS quarterly's review processes: 1995–
2001, MIS Quarterly 26 (2) (2002) v–xi.


[35] R. Yalow, Competency testing for reviewers and editors, in: S. Harnad
(Ed.), Peer commentary on peer review: A case study in scientific
control, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1982,
pp. 60–61.


Munir Mandviwalla, Associate Professor, founding chair of the Management
Information Systems department, and Executive Director, Irwin L. Gross
Institute for Business and Information Technology, Fox School of Business,
Temple University holds a BSc in Systems Engineering from Boston
University, an MBA from the Peter F. Drucker School of Management at
Claremont Graduate University, and a Ph.D. in Management Information
Systems from the Programs in Information Science at Claremont Graduate
University. His current research interests include communication technolo-
gies, globalization, and the use of prototyping for theory development. His
publications have appeared in Management Information Systems Quarterly,
ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction, Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce, Decision Support Systems, Small
Group Research, Communications of the Association for Information
Systems, and Information Systems Journal.


Ravi Patnayakuni is an Associate Professor of information systems in the
Department of Economics and Management Information Systems at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville. His research focuses on, digital supply
chains, IT business value, IT implementation, systems development and
knowledge management. Ravi received his D.B.A from Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale and has held positions at Temple University and The
University of Melbourne, Australia prior to his current appointment. His
research has been published in Journal of Management Information Systems,
MIS Quarterly, Communications of the ACM, Omega, Communications of the
AIS, and Information Systems Journal.


David Schuff is Assistant Professor of Management Information Systems in
the Fox School of Business and Management at Temple University. He holds a
BA in Economics from the University of Pittsburgh, an MBA from Villanova
University, an MS in Information Management from Arizona State University,
and a Ph.D. in Business Administration from Arizona State University. His
research interests include the strategic use of information systems, the
assessment of total cost of ownership in large networked organizations, and
data warehousing. His work has been published in journals such as Decision
Support Systems, Information & Management, Communications of the ACM,
and Information Systems Journal.




