









ScienceDirect


Available online at www.sciencedirect.comAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com


ScienceDirect
Procedia CIRP 00 (2017) 000–000


  www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 


2212-8271 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


28th CIRP Design Conference, May 2018, Nantes, France


A new methodology to analyze the functional and physical architecture of 
existing products for an assembly oriented product family identification 


Paul Stief *, Jean-Yves Dantan, Alain Etienne, Ali Siadat 
École Nationale Supérieure d’Arts et Métiers, Arts et Métiers ParisTech, LCFC EA 4495, 4 Rue Augustin Fresnel, Metz 57078, France 


* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 3 87 37 54 30; E-mail address: paul.stief@ensam.eu


Abstract 


In today’s business environment, the trend towards more product variety and customization is unbroken. Due to this development, the need of 
agile and reconfigurable production systems emerged to cope with various products and product families. To design and optimize production
systems as well as to choose the optimal product matches, product analysis methods are needed. Indeed, most of the known methods aim to 
analyze a product or one product family on the physical level. Different product families, however, may differ largely in terms of the number and 
nature of components. This fact impedes an efficient comparison and choice of appropriate product family combinations for the production
system. A new methodology is proposed to analyze existing products in view of their functional and physical architecture. The aim is to cluster
these products in new assembly oriented product families for the optimization of existing assembly lines and the creation of future reconfigurable 
assembly systems. Based on Datum Flow Chain, the physical structure of the products is analyzed. Functional subassemblies are identified, and 
a functional analysis is performed. Moreover, a hybrid functional and physical architecture graph (HyFPAG) is the output which depicts the 
similarity between product families by providing design support to both, production system planners and product designers. An illustrative
example of a nail-clipper is used to explain the proposed methodology. An industrial case study on two product families of steering columns of 
thyssenkrupp Presta France is then carried out to give a first industrial evaluation of the proposed approach. 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 28th CIRP Design Conference 2018. 


Keywords: Assembly; Design method; Family identification


1. Introduction 


Due to the fast development in the domain of 
communication and an ongoing trend of digitization and
digitalization, manufacturing enterprises are facing important
challenges in today’s market environments: a continuing
tendency towards reduction of product development times and
shortened product lifecycles. In addition, there is an increasing
demand of customization, being at the same time in a global 
competition with competitors all over the world. This trend, 
which is inducing the development from macro to micro 
markets, results in diminished lot sizes due to augmenting
product varieties (high-volume to low-volume production) [1]. 
To cope with this augmenting variety as well as to be able to
identify possible optimization potentials in the existing
production system, it is important to have a precise knowledge


of the product range and characteristics manufactured and/or 
assembled in this system. In this context, the main challenge in
modelling and analysis is now not only to cope with single 
products, a limited product range or existing product families,
but also to be able to analyze and to compare products to define
new product families. It can be observed that classical existing
product families are regrouped in function of clients or features.
However, assembly oriented product families are hardly to find. 


On the product family level, products differ mainly in two
main characteristics: (i) the number of components and (ii) the
type of components (e.g. mechanical, electrical, electronical). 


Classical methodologies considering mainly single products 
or solitary, already existing product families analyze the
product structure on a physical level (components level) which 
causes difficulties regarding an efficient definition and
comparison of different product families. Addressing this 


Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13


2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems.
10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.147


© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 








2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems. 


11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems, IPS2 2019, 29-31 May 2019,  
Zhuhai & Hong Kong, China 


Integrating Product-Service Systems into the manufacturing industry: 
Industry 4.0 perspectives 


 Trevor Bogani Shihundlaa, Khumbulani Mpofua, Olukorede Tijani Adenugaa*  
"Tswane University of Technology, Staartsartillirie road, Pretoria 0001, South Africa"  





* Corresponding author. Tel.: +2761638731; fax: +27-012-382-4847. E-mail address:olukorede.adenuga@gmail.com  


Abstract 


Industry 4.0 is the current trend in the technologies used in exchange of data in manufacturing. Product-service system is a concept that 
provides self-aware and self-learning machines, and consequently improve overall performance and maintenance management. Companies 
continually strive to increase production, but in recent years, the effects of this effort have demonstrated that provision of products alone with 
less resilient technology-enabled service industry is insufficient to remain competitive. The importance of leveraging flexibility and capabilities 
offered by cloud computing is inevitable, but adapting prognostics and health management algorithms to efficiently implement current data 
management technologies was research and develop in this study. In this paper, we present an integrated product-service system as a potential 
concept from a life-cycle perspective to reduce disruption, costs and associated services such as autonomous maintenance, through exchange of 
data to understand equipment degradation using sensors application, to aid timely services intervention for manufacturing processes 
transformation. The results is the knowledge base servitude backed by machine clusters generated data for different working conditions to 
improve operational efficiency using Cloud IoT to connect, process, store, and analyse data on the dashboard, locally and in the cloud for future 
health assessment. 


© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems. 


 Keywords: Integrating Product Service Ssytem; Cyber Physical System; Industry 4.0; Internet of Things 


 
1. Introduction 


The continued development of infrastructure is critical to 
ensuring economic growth and jobs creation for many 
unemployed people. The traditional business model requires 
obtaining raw material, components, and converting them into 
a product through a manufacturing processes, and assembly 
them until the sales stage. The transfer of ownership happens 
at the sales stage, where the customer takes ownership of the 
product. The complexity of such a system require that all 
stakeholders involved in the system collaborate for value 
creation. Service innovation involves using service 
information to selling a product, while Product-service 
systems requires data management and distribution in Big 


Data environment for achieving self-aware and self-learning 
machines. The products service system creates relationship 
amongst valued stakeholders, while the threats to transform 
the economy and reinvigorate the manufacturing industry due 
to emerging markets and global manufacturing supply chain 
has prompted organizations to enhance their product service 
systems.  In the manufacturing, the transformation from 
today’s status into more intelligent machines requires further 
advancement in the field by tackling several fundamental 
issues, while manufacturing companies make quality products 
as well as improve service by utilizing service knowledge 
from similar products to improve the design and 
manufacturing of the new products with associated services 
such as autonomous maintenance. Industry 4.0 involves the 





Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 


ScienceDirect 
Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


  
     www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 








2212-8271 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems. 


11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems, IPS2 2019, 29-31 May 2019,  
Zhuhai & Hong Kong, China 


Integrating Product-Service Systems into the manufacturing industry: 
Industry 4.0 perspectives 


 Trevor Bogani Shihundlaa, Khumbulani Mpofua, Olukorede Tijani Adenugaa*  
"Tswane University of Technology, Staartsartillirie road, Pretoria 0001, South Africa"  





* Corresponding author. Tel.: +2761638731; fax: +27-012-382-4847. E-mail address:olukorede.adenuga@gmail.com  


Abstract 


Industry 4.0 is the current trend in the technologies used in exchange of data in manufacturing. Product-service system is a concept that 
provides self-aware and self-learning machines, and consequently improve overall performance and maintenance management. Companies 
continually strive to increase production, but in recent years, the effects of this effort have demonstrated that provision of products alone with 
less resilient technology-enabled service industry is insufficient to remain competitive. The importance of leveraging flexibility and capabilities 
offered by cloud computing is inevitable, but adapting prognostics and health management algorithms to efficiently implement current data 
management technologies was research and develop in this study. In this paper, we present an integrated product-service system as a potential 
concept from a life-cycle perspective to reduce disruption, costs and associated services such as autonomous maintenance, through exchange of 
data to understand equipment degradation using sensors application, to aid timely services intervention for manufacturing processes 
transformation. The results is the knowledge base servitude backed by machine clusters generated data for different working conditions to 
improve operational efficiency using Cloud IoT to connect, process, store, and analyse data on the dashboard, locally and in the cloud for future 
health assessment. 


© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 11th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems. 


 Keywords: Integrating Product Service Ssytem; Cyber Physical System; Industry 4.0; Internet of Things 


 
1. Introduction 


The continued development of infrastructure is critical to 
ensuring economic growth and jobs creation for many 
unemployed people. The traditional business model requires 
obtaining raw material, components, and converting them into 
a product through a manufacturing processes, and assembly 
them until the sales stage. The transfer of ownership happens 
at the sales stage, where the customer takes ownership of the 
product. The complexity of such a system require that all 
stakeholders involved in the system collaborate for value 
creation. Service innovation involves using service 
information to selling a product, while Product-service 
systems requires data management and distribution in Big 


Data environment for achieving self-aware and self-learning 
machines. The products service system creates relationship 
amongst valued stakeholders, while the threats to transform 
the economy and reinvigorate the manufacturing industry due 
to emerging markets and global manufacturing supply chain 
has prompted organizations to enhance their product service 
systems.  In the manufacturing, the transformation from 
today’s status into more intelligent machines requires further 
advancement in the field by tackling several fundamental 
issues, while manufacturing companies make quality products 
as well as improve service by utilizing service knowledge 
from similar products to improve the design and 
manufacturing of the new products with associated services 
such as autonomous maintenance. Industry 4.0 involves the 






 Trevor Bogani Shihundla  et al. / Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13 9
2 Author name / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


use of digital transformation in Big Data/Analytics, Internet of 
Things, and Robotics, to realize connected factories, smart 
decentralized manufacturing and the digital supply chain.  


Cyber-Physical System (CPS) is an open system, which 
composed of cyber and physical parts [1] and belong to 
system that fit a wide class of generic systems, with smart 
products, intelligent systems, complex and adaptive systems. 
The future industry will be able to achieve a fleet-wide 
information system that helps machines to be self-aware and 
actively prevents potential performance issues [2].  CPS 
services are partly autonomous, multimodal and 
multifunctional, networked and distributed along the 
application area, which are adapted to current systems 
requirements and independent from location [3, 4].  


The autonomous computing methodology has be 
successfully implemented in computer science with the use of 
self-learning machines, but still far from implementation in 
the current industries. The emergence of sensing technology in 
the developments of IOT framework have created a unified 
information that tightly connects humans and systems together 
to populates a big data environment with more advanced 
analytics in the advent of cloud computing [2]. The 
importance of leveraging flexibility and capabilities offered by 
cloud computing is inevitable, but adapting prognostics and 
health management algorithms to efficiently implement 
current data management technologies prompted this research. 


The offering of integrated products and services as an 
effective strategy for meeting varied and rapidly changing 
customer needs with more value creation for the customers 
according to [5] is also a matter of concern for both 
manufacturers and service providers. The need for companies 
to offer fuller market packages or bundles of customer-
focused combinations of goods, services, support, self-service 
and knowledge is termed as manufacturing servitization, an 
innovation of organizational capabilities and processes, from 
product sales to integrated product services [6]. The work of 
[7] on Product-Service Systems (PSS) across Life Cycle 
Novel Tools for PSS reveals that tools to support effective 
engineering of services around such products are still missing. 
The speed of computation, ease of deployment and investment 
cost, on an integrated predictive analytics, and visualization 
platform [8] can increase the drivers for change within the 
industry and thereby increase cost efficiency and quality from 
a life-cycle perspective [9,10]. The transmission elements for 
Integrating Product-Service Systems process into the 
manufacturing industry in Figure 1, involve the product life 
cycle through a service of product embedded sensor elements, 
through data processing and transmission communicating via 
IoT for product health assessment, compare, prediction, user 
relationship mining and clustering, with informed decisions to 
the manufacturing processes. 





 
Fig. 1. Transmission elements for Integrating Product-Service Systems process into the manufacturing industry  
 
In this paper, we present an integrated product-service 


system as a potential concept from a life-cycle perspective to 
reduce disruption, costs and associated services such as 
autonomous maintenance, through exchange of data to 
understand equipment degradation using sensors application, 
to aid timely services intervention for manufacturing 
processes transformation. The paper is organize as follows: 
Section 2 focuses on evaluation of current technology; 
Section 3 describes the Product Service System 
transformation. Section 4 presents Integrated Product Service 
Systems Methodology, Design and Operating mechanism; and 
Section 5 present the results of the Back end coding and 


Dashboard for sensor Integrated Product-Service for data 
analytics and Section 6 is the concludes the paper with some 
perspectives. The aim of the integrated products service 
system is to create a manufacturing system that produces 
quality products, aid by timely services intervention using 
interconnected systems and intelligent data analysis for 
factory transformation and production management at the best 
possible time to predict failure therefore reduce disruption, 
costs and associated services such as maintenance. The 
system is customer focus by combining products, services, 
support and knowledge. 


 






10 Trevor Bogani Shihundla  et al. / Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13
 Author name / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  3 


2. Evaluation of current technology 


2.1 Dedicated manufacturing systems limitations 


Dedicated manufacturing systems are single purpose 
machines; they focus on producing of a particular product. 
Their advantage is high production volumes and production 
cost reduction. This type of applicable machine technologies 
cannot do a product mix, time consuming, costly and have to 
change for different products. In the evolving Industry 4.0 era, 
intelligent analytics and cyber-physical systems are teaming 
together to realize a new thinking of production management 
and factory transformation. Companies have realized that 
dedicated systems use in producing more products are not 
desire enough to remain competitive. 


2.2 Flexible manufacturing system limitations 


A flexible manufacturing system consists of computer 
numerically controlled machine tools, which is a system that 
provide flexibility to manufacturing so that a variety of parts 
can be produce when there is a demand in the market. These 
type of manufacturing systems are very expensive due to extra 
design flexibility and capacity. They are complex and require 
skilled workers that were train to operate the system. The 
software and hardware being use cannot be change when there 
is a demand and these makes these systems irrelevant [11]. 
They cannot support the actual processing of big data into 
useful information, which is key to the sustainable innovation 
within an Industry 4.0 factory. The product development 
process interlinked with supporting services through a cyber-
physical system, which enables the extraction of useful data 
for maintenance and related activities. 


2.3 Reconfigurable manufacturing systems 


The ability of a company to start new product models 
quickly and the potential for rapid alteration of manufacturing 
system capacity is becoming important in today’s economy. 
Reconfigurable manufacturing systems (RMS) are widely 
consider as one of the promising key technologies to enable 
responsiveness to the new production era, known as mass 
customization. In order for companies to remain competitive 
in the unpredictable and changing market conditions, 
flexibility must be combine with responsiveness, high 
reliability, scalability, ability for easy software and cost 
efficiency [12, 13]. The developments of an Internet of Things 
(IOT) framework and the emergence of sensing technology 
have created a unified information grid that tightly connects 
systems and humans together, which further populates a big 
data environment in the industry. There is more advanced 
analytics with the advent of cloud computing and a Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) framework. Future industry will be 
able to achieve an information system that helps machines to 
be self-aware and actively prevents potential performance 
issues. 





3. Product Service System transformation  


2.1. The Product Service System originated in north of 
Europe at the end of the 1990s. The number of PSS 
publications has grown over the years, but many researchers 
discussed this concept in such a different terms as 
“servitization”, “dematerialization”, “service design”, and 
“sustainability”, among others. The concept of the PSS as an 
attempt that has been made to identify all the following 
terminology such as “service design”, “service economy 
system solution”, “remanufacturing”, “functional economy” 
and “product substituting service” [14]. However, the term 
used most often (in almost half of the searched articles) was 
“product-service system” obviously, it is important to 
consider this as the main keyword in this area. Increasingly, 
companies are displacing solely tangible products with 
products based on services. The trend intend to add value to a 
business [15], because services are dominating the market, 
businesses and researchers must develop tools that consider 
service operation [16]. The key elements of the PSS are: (i) 
the product; (ii) the service, in which an activity is perform 
without the need for a tangible good or without the need for 
the system; (iii) and the combination of products, services, 
and their relationships. The prevailing tools used in solving 
the manufacturing challenges are simulation, modelling and 
agents. Inferentially, the trend of proffering solutions to 
complex and most challenging manufacturing problems has 
been between the uses of multi-agents systems to controls, 
process plan, enterprise integration and scheduling [17]. 
Transformation from today’s status into more intelligent 
machines requires further advancement in the science by 
tackling several fundamental issues, divided into five distinct 
categories according to [2]: 


3.1 Manager and operator interaction 
 


The operator operates the machines within the company 
while the manager is responsible for designing logistics 
schedules for operators and machines. The decision on the 
health condition of the machine components is significantly 
important factor in communicating the failure on machines by 
the operators to managers. The product service systems 
exploits this gap, while the invisible issues in an industrial 
factory around the information generation algorithm will be 
design to detect and address machine degradation, component 
wear on the factory floor. 


 
3.2 Machine fleet 
 


It is extremely important that similar or identical machines 
are being expose to completely different working conditions 
for different tasks. Health management methods are not taking 
advantage of considering these identical machines as a fleet 
by gathering worthwhile knowledge from different instances. 
An adaptive but yet powerful methodology is required to 
manage, categorize and process data for further analysis by 
prognostic health management algorithms. Machines that 
have similar operating mechanism can be exposed to different 
working conditions, data can be extracted from both instances 






 Trevor Bogani Shihundla  et al. / Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13 11
4 Author name / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


and conclusions can be drawn from the data. The data can be 
analysed for better understanding of health condition. 


 
3.3 Product and process 
 


Product Quality (PQ) can provide feedback for system 
management, used to improve production scheduling. The 
feedback loops used for monitoring quality are unavailable 
and need further research. The feedback loops are prognostic 
health management analytical engine that can capture those 
failure signatures from various assets (machines) to refine its 
failure detection and estimation capabilities. 


 
3.4 Big data and cloud 
 


The importance of leveraging additional flexibility and 
capabilities offered by cloud computing is inevitable but 
adapting prognostics and health management algorithm to 
efficiently implement current data management technologies 
requires further research and development. There are various 
data sources available to provide worthwhile information 
about different aspects of the factory. In the product 
development stage, the utilization of data for understanding 
the current condition and detect faults and failures is an 
important topic to research.   


 
3.5 Sensor and controller network 
 


Sensor failure and degradation may send an inaccurate 
reading to decision-making algorithm, which will result in an 
incorrect outcome. Most prognostic health management 
methods have access to target only asset data. Asset data 
might contain hundreds of sensory and system data readings 
and provide good insight and prognostics results for the 
current asset. However, there are much more sources of 
information that are not considered in today's implementation 
of prognostics management methods. Peer-to-peer evaluation 
through fleet of assets, life-cycle historical data from identical 


assets and system configuration are few examples of the huge 
portion of data that is ignore by now. 


4.  Integrated Product Service Systems Methodology, 
Design and Operating mechanism  


4.1 Integrated Product Service Systems Methodology 
 


Intelligent analytics and cyber-physical systems are 
teaming together to realize a new thinking of production 
management and factory transformation. Industries are 
generating big data, which require effective processing into 
useful information for sustainable innovation within an 
industry 4.0 environment. The cloud technology form the core 
of the integrated product service system, they are  
1. Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), which forms the server 


storage network consisting of data centers, hardware, 
virtual server space, bandwidth and cloud hosting.  


2. Platform as a service (PaaS), which involves the 
manufacturing software, network access, database, 
security, scripting, and hosting, which is the physical 
environment that involves the end user using a packaged 
software operating system and application developer. 


3. Software as a service (Saas) is the access on the cloud 
through a packaged software, iOS, mobile computer and 
cellphone, while the application has a specific kind of 
coding and server customized to each product 
manufacturer according to their need. Security access 
could be through the private cloud, public cloud, and 
hybrid cloud. Information extract from the production 
application process to establish a knowledge base and 
related algorithm to represent machine degradation and 
performance behaviour in the physical world. Integration 
of the internet and product users’ core will be enhance. 
Figure 1 illustrates the traditional product development 
and support services interacts with internet of things 
(IOTs), and transmission elements. 





Fig. 2: Integrated Product and service metal model component  


 






12 Trevor Bogani Shihundla  et al. / Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13
 Author name / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000  5 


4.2 Integrated Product Service Design and Operating 
mechanism 


A self-aware and self-maintained machine that self-assess 
its own degradation and health, exchange data to understand 
product degradation through embedded sensor application to 
aid timely services intervention using interconnected systems 
and intelligent data analysis for factory transformation and 
production management. The sensor network pick up the data 
in form of current, voltage, resistance, temperature, 
transferred information via wireless or through Internet of 
Things (IoT) [12] gateway method, it allow communication of 
various webs application at the best possible time to predict 
failure therefore reduce disruption, and costs..  


The raw data is transform into useful information in cross-
platform development that allow Android and iOS 
(information operation systems), to use the same code across  
React Native Framework (Real Time Communication for IoT) 
with Firebase, which is NoSQL (Non Structured Query 
Language) database to store data in JSON (JavaScript Object 
Notation) for easy application to access and store data 
seamlessly. Communication between the Android and IOS is 
done and implemented by a common communication medium 
HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) and FTP (File Transfer 
protocol), to communicate between the device with a bit 
complex software for a simple application. Google firebase, 
which use NoSQL as an intermediate communication medium 
between for IoT devices using the powerful real-time database 
and application programmable interface (API). This 
application use Visual Code as Code Editor, Android Studio 
for running the emulator, NodeJs (open-source, cross-
platform JavaScript run-time environment) for running the 
server, with the hardware platform for Arduino IDE 
(integrated development environment).                                               


Figure 2 is the IPSS metal model component for 
implementation platform, which uses analogue and digital 
information transformation from peers for smart maintenance 
decisions to handle machine health information issues that is 
required for the knowledge base to provide health assessment; 
compare information with generated data with its clusters 
through data mining techniques and prediction algorithm.  


5. Results of the Back end coding and Dashboard for 
sensor Integrated Product-Service for data analytics 


The knowledge base servitude backed by machine clusters 
generated data for different working conditions to improve 
operational efficiency using Cloud IoT to connect, process, 
store, and analyse data on the dashboard, locally and in the 
cloud for future health assessment. The platform pull data 
from the database for display and push data to the cloud 
database. The database connect to firebase using Firebase 
Database Class for information networking to analyse and 
model Energy Efficiency for manufacturing in the context of 
industry 4.0 as presented by [18], and described in metal 
model shown in figure 3 and 4, with servitation components 
in data analytics in this context. The concretization of the 
three levels of abstraction in product-services for 
manufacturing industry communicate the need for established 
health assessment on products through the embedded sensory 
devices to the manufacturing processes for adjustment on the 
products design for market competiveness and inform the 
service centers of the failure autonomously for relative action. 
Product-Service components are model separately by function 
models, and a model of working principles for processes and 
resources linked by infrastructure in the coupling between the 
elements. The codes provides out-of-the-box support for 
devices to trigger automatic changes based on real-time 
events using Real Time Communication for IoT.  








Fig. 3. Back end coding for sensor Integrated Product-Service for data analytics 
 


6. Conclusion  


The concept and applications of the IPSS have remained 
rather fixed, while the business models of the IPSS frequently 


emphasize its economic aspects, the integration or method of 
integration is research in this dichotomy. It enables managers 
to plan an integrated PSS according to their goal and 
competitive position. In future studies, researchers should 






 Trevor Bogani Shihundla  et al. / Procedia CIRP 83 (2019) 8–13 13
6 Author name / Procedia CIRP 00 (2019) 000–000 


delve into the environmental and social aspects of IPSS, 
because they act as the main barriers to achieving a wholly 
successful PSS. This research contribute to management 
practice; as a taxonomy, that allows classification of 
systematics and engineering. The manufacturing industries is 
moving towards Industry 4.0 with the notion that it is not 
enough just to sell products and improve profitability. The 
real impact on profitability comes from exploiting 
downstream opportunities by providing the customer with 
access to newer business models like the product-service 
system. The paper propose self-aware and self-maintenance 
for products to offer a better service system, an approach 
driven by a task model processes for embedded sensor in real-


time systems to support reactive control processing. The 
approach emphasizes the importance of customer’s early 
participation in the design process for increased value 
creation. 


Acknowledgements 


The authors sincere acknowledged the support of Tshwane 
University of Technology (TUT), Gibela Rail Transport 
Consortium (GTRC) and Innovative Manufacturing Design 
Solution Group (IMSDG) research team. 





Fig. 4. Dashboard for sensor Integrated Product-Service for data analytic 
 


References 


[1] Lindströma J., Löfstrand M., Reedc S., Alzghoulb A. (2014). Use of 
Cloud Services in Functional Products: availability implications. 
University of Windsor, Canada: The International Academy for 
Production Engineering (CIRP). 


[2] Lee J, Kao H, Yang S. (2014) Service innovation and smart analytics for 
Industry 4.0 and big data environment. Procedia CIRP 16 3 – 8. 


[3] Geisberger E, Broy M. (2012). Agenda CPS: Integrierte Forschungs 
agenda Cyber Physical Systems, National Academy of Science and 
Engineering. 


[4] Bettenhausen K. D,  Kowalewski, S. (2013). Cyber Physical Systems: 
Chancen und Nutzen aus Sicht der Automation in: Thesen und 
Handlungsfelder,  


[5] Sundin, E. (2009): Life-Cycle Perspectives of Product / Service- Systems: 
In Design Theory. In Intro-duction to Product/Service-System design, 31-
49. 


[6] Baines, T. S., Lightfoot, H. W., Benedettini, O., & Kay, J. M. (2009). The 
servitization of manufacturing: a review of literature and reflection on 
future challenges. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 
20(5), 547-567. 


[7] Scholze S, Correi A. T, Stokic D. (2016). Product-Service Systems across 
Life Cycle Novel Tools for Product-Service System Engineering.. 
Procedia CIRP 47 120 – 125. 


[8] Lee, J., Lapira, E., Bagheri, B., & Kao, H. A. (2013). Recent advances and 
trends in predictive manufacturing systems in big data environment. 
Manufacturing Letters, 1(1), 38-41. 


[9] McAfee, A., & Brynjolfsson, E. (2012). Big data: the management 
revolution. Harvard business review, 90(10), 60-68. 


[10] Provost, F., & Fawcett, T. (2013). Data Science and its Relationship to 
Big Data and Data-Driven Decision Making. Big Data, 1(1), 51-59. 


[11] Fundamentals of modern manufacturing, Wiley, Mikell P. Groover, page 
247 – 255. Pg 257 – 300. 


[12] Mpofu K. (2011). Knowledge-Based design of reconfigurable 
manufacturing system advisor, Tshwane University Of technology, DR , 
page 24 – 36. 


[13] Adenuga OT, Mpofu K, Adeyeri MK. Agent-based control system 
methodology for reconfigurable bending press machine. Procedia CIRP 
Journal, 2016, 57C; 362-367. DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.063. 


[14] Windahl C, Lakemond N. Developing integrated solutions: the 
importance of relationships within the network. Industrial Marketing 
Management 2006;35(7):806-818. 


[15] Tan, A.R., Matzen, D., McAloone, T.C., & Evans, S.,. (2010). Strategies 
for designing and developing services for manufacturing firms. CIRP 
Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 3(2), 90e97. 


[16] Martinez V., Bastl M., Kingston J., & Evans S. (2010). Challenges in 
transforming manufacturing organisations into product-service providers. 
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 21(4), 449-469. 


[17] Adeyeri, M. K., Mpofu, K., & Olukorede, T. A. (2015). Integration of 
agent technology into manufacturing enterprise: A review and platform 
for industry 4.0. In Industrial Engineering and Operations Management 
(IEOM). International Conference on IEEE. [18] Vasantha GVA, Roy R, 
Lelah A, Brissaud D. A review of product service systems design 
methodologies. Journal of Engineering Design. 2012;23:635-59. 


[18] Adenuga OT, Mpofu K, Ramatsetse IB. Energy Efficiency Analysis 
Modelling System for manufacturing in the context of industry 4.0. 
Advancing Industrial Sustainability Published by Elsevier as a special 
Issue (SI) of Procedia CIRP affiliated with CIRP, Available from 
https://authors.elsevier.com/tracking/article/details.do?aid=395294&jid=P
ROCIR&surname=ADENUGA. 2019. In press. 


 




