









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


International Journal of Production Economics


journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe


Supply chain digitisation trends: An integration of knowledge management
Dara G. Schniederjansa, Carla Curadob, Mehrnaz Khalajhedayatia,∗
aUniversity of Rhode Island, USA
b ISEG – Technical University of Lisbon, USA


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Digitisation
Knowledge management
Forecasting
Supply chain


A B S T R A C T


The rapid digitisation of industry, or industry 4.0, is trending in supply chain management. While the amount of
data made available through digitisation has enabled supply chain benefits, there still exist challenges regarding
the rapid digitisation of the field. Therein lies opportunities for scholars to leverage the growing amount of data
through knowledge management to cultivate valuable information for organisations. The purpose of this paper is
to understand future inquiries for scholars to broaden their perspectives and leveraging knowledge management
to enhance the supply chain digitisation research paradigm. This is done through both a large-scale literature
review as well as a textual analysis and forecasting on industry- and field-applications, technologies and topics in
digitisation. Utilizing textual data as well as google trends data from 2010 to 2018, comparisons are conducted
on two measurements (prevalence and growth) to determine significant differences between the scholarly
publications and practitioner (news and video) media to compare scholarly vs. practitioner activity in the
aforementioned areas of supply chain digitisation. Applying the field of knowledge management to supply chain
management through a knowledge management theoretical framework, this paper provides future research
inquiries pertaining to how scholars can utilize the largely ignored areas of supply chain digitisation as well as
the growing areas to explain how the human dimension of supply chain management can be further explored for
the purposes of optimizing supply chain digital performance.


1. Introduction


The rapid digitisation of industry, or Industry 4.0, is trending in
supply chain management. The opportunities surrounding digitisation
have made it possible for supply chains to access, store and process a
large amount of data both from within a firm and externally. For ex-
ample, manufacturing firms are now able to obtain individualized
customer data to personalize the sales process, product design and
service. One application of this is through smart devices which record
and share data in order to identify opportunities using learning algo-
rithms (Feng and Shanthikumar, 2018). Digitisation also allows for
demand information to be shared directly to actuators in manufacturing
plants, leading to shorter changeover time and enhanced service level.
The amount of data stored and disseminated has also enhanced both
predictive accuracy and facilitation of prescriptive solutions. Specifi-
cally, forecasting applications of big data have recently proliferated in
such areas as entertainment (Goel et al., 2010); auto parts (Choi and
Varian, 2012), hotels (Yang et al., 2014) and the retail industry (Cui
et al., 2017). Retail stores can now collect data from their consumers
including an entire purchase history, where they can be subsequently
identified through membership information or payment methods


allowing the company to understand and analyze the characteristics of
the shopper and predict consumer behavior (Guha and Kumar, 2018).
In addition to demand planning, digitisation has also had a profound
impact on the manufacturing environment with sensors, processors and
actuators collecting real time data about machines, enabling not only
communication between machines but also sharing the data throughout
the supply chain network to keep downstream and upstream supply
chain partners informed of various processes.


While the amount of data made available throughout digitisation
has enabled these benefits, there are a myriad of challenges that are
currently unaddressed in scholarly literature. This is made evident in
both news and media where there is a lack of knowledge surrounding
how to implement and utilize the proliferation of data for the strategic
vision of the supply chain network. For example, the adequate assess-
ment and detection of biases, noise and abnormality in data as well as
the information sharing across the boundaries of legally independent
organisations is needed to enhance the sharing of competencies and the
exploitation of opportunities not only between large entities in the
supply chain but also the small and medium enterprises who have
limited resources and capabilities (Feng and Shanthikumar, 2018).
Another facet understudied in scholarly literature is trust in knowledge


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012
Received 2 November 2018; Received in revised form 14 June 2019; Accepted 13 July 2019


∗ Corresponding author. College of Business, Supply Chain Management, University of Rhode Island, 7 Lippitt road, Ballentine Hall, Office 216, USA.
E-mail addresses: schniederjans@uri.edu (D.G. Schniederjans), ccurado@iseg.ulisboa.pt (C. Curado), mkhalajhedayati@uri.edu (M. Khalajhedayati).


International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


Available online 16 July 2019
0925-5273/ Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).


T



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09255273

https://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012

mailto:schniederjans@uri.edu

mailto:ccurado@iseg.ulisboa.pt

mailto:mkhalajhedayati@uri.edu

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.012&domain=pdf




sharing which is vital especially considering the increased need to store
proprietary data in a globally connected digitized environment. As an
example, equipment suppliers are often reluctant to share machine
status which ultimately impacts both productivity and quality. Finally,
when it comes to coordination, the ultimate goal of balancing and
consolidating limited resources across different organisations requires
the optimization of resource allocation as well as human resource
capability investments in knowledge sharing distributed networks
(Feng and Shanthikumar, 2018).


Digitisation has caused both excitement and fear speculating both
the possibilities to supply chain management as well as inevitable
threats including the loss of jobs in the field. Articles like Lyall et al.
(2018) foretell the “death of supply chain”, explaining that leading
companies are utilizing robotics and artificial intelligence to automate
labor-intensive tasks and processes in purchasing, invoicing, accounts
payable and customer service. Further sensor data has rendered ma-
chine use and maintenance to an automatic state. Blockchains are be-
ginning to reduce third party involvement. Robots are utilized to au-
tomate production. Lastly, drones and autonomous vehicles are
beginning to approach implementation, soon to automate transporta-
tion. Lyall et al. (2018) concludes that it is these developments in di-
gitisation that will allow a single organisation to manage the supply
chain remotely while reducing safety concerns and the need for workers
in remote locations. Yet despite this concern, organisations still face the
challenges of extracting knowledge from data as well as implementing
these technologies within a small portion of the supply chain, much
less, end-to-end.


However, individuals are still needed to optimize the use of these
technologies for supply chain network performance. Knowledge man-
agement, which involves the process of creating, sharing, using and
managing knowledge and information in an organisation, is needed to
facilitate the process of converting these vast amounts of data to
knowledge. Although facets of digitisation including machine learning
seek to automate “learning” in organisations, the proliferation of these
technologies are not yet viable in strategic thinking for supply chain
management. Yet, with all the data made available, understanding how
to extract, share and use knowledge is becoming more fundamental.
Thus, this paper seeks to address the following research questions: what
industry- and field-applications, technologies and topics in supply chain
digitisation are prevalent and growing among scholars and practi-
tioners? And further are there differences between the prevalence and
growth between scholars and practitioners? Finally, if there are dif-
ferences, from a knowledge management perspective, how can supply
chain scholars apply knowledge management to specific industry- and
field-applications, technologies and topics to benefit not only scholarly
research but practitioner insight?


To address these questions, this study utilizes a large-scale literature
review as well as a textual analysis and forecasting (on scholarly pub-
lications and news/video media data) referencing the industry- and
field-applications, technologies and topics in digitisation. Utilizing
textual data as well as google trends data from 2010 to 2018, com-
parisons are conducted on two measurements (prevalence and growth)
to determine significant differences between the scholarly publications
and practitioner (news and video) media to compare scholarly vs.
practitioner activity in the aforementioned areas of supply chain digi-
tisation. Applying the field of knowledge management to supply chain
management through a knowledge management theoretical framework,
this paper provides future research inquiries pertaining to how scholars
can utilize the largely ignored areas of supply chain digitisation as well
as the growing areas to explain how the human dimension of supply
chain management can be further explored for the purposes of opti-
mizing supply chain digital performance.


The paper is organized as follows: first, an overview of knowledge
management and its relation to supply chain digitisation is presented.
Following this, the paper presents the methodology including the col-
lection and interpretation of textual data from both scholars and


practitioners as well as the statistical analyses conducted to assess the
differences in frequencies. Additionally, a variant of the Croston
method of forecasting (Linear Exponential smoothing) is utilized to
forecast both scholarly publications as well as practitioner media to
determine growth in specific industry- and field-applications, technol-
ogies and topics. A research model is then presented which indicates the
two dimensions of frequency and growth on industry- and field-appli-
cations as well as technologies and topics from both a scholar and
practitioner standpoint. Similarities between these two dimensions are
then applied to the field of knowledge management to gather scholarly
insights and future research directions to utilize knowledge manage-
ment for enhancing the benefits of digitisation for supply chain man-
agement.


2. Literature review


Knowledge management (KM) bridges information demand and
supply on behalf of learning processes and, consequently, organisa-
tional performance improvement (Curado and Bontis, 2011). Knowl-
edge assumes tacit and explicit forms (Polanyi, 1962). Tacit knowledge
is deeply rooted in action, commitment, and involvement and, thus, it is
hard to formalize and communicate. Explicit knowledge is codified and
transmittable in formal, systematic language and thus it is captured in
libraries, archives, and databases (Nonaka, 1994). There is a permanent
interaction between tacit and explicit knowledge that moves across
individuals, groups, organisations, and back to individuals again
(Nonaka and Toyama, 2003). The theory of knowledge creation
(Nonaka, 1994) proposes that knowledge is created over an endless
cycle and, thus, increases organisational knowledge via: a) socializa-
tion, b) externalization, c) combination and d) internalization. Socia-
lization demands face-to-face communications among organisation
members to exchange tacit knowledge. Externalization requires in-
dividuals to transform tacit into explicit knowledge thereby allowing it
to be captured by others in the organisation. Combination consists of
transforming explicit knowledge into more complex forms, and inter-
nalization converts explicit knowledge back into tacit form allowing
individuals to include it into their personal routines (Curado and Bontis,
2011). Given such a theory, we must acknowledge that a major step in
the knowledge creation process is based upon human interaction,
challenging the technology basis of supply chain digitisation.


According to the (March 1991) model, knowledge management
relies on the tension between the processes of exploration and ex-
ploitation. Exploration consists of the development of new organisa-
tional routines and solutions. Whereas exploitation consists of lever-
aging current routines to refine solutions and pre-existing knowledge.
Both knowledge management strategies should be applied for sustain-
able competitive advantage. The correct balance is hard to achieve
since organisations learn from experience how to divide resources be-
tween exploration (efficacy driven) and exploitation (efficiency driven)
(Curado and Bontis, 2011). In order to use the exploration strategy
(creating innovations) digitisation supports high-qualified employees;
whereas when opting for applying an exploitation strategy (improving
routines) digitisation replaces low-qualified employees (Wilkesmann
and Wilkesmann, 2018). According to Cepeda Carrión et al. (2004)
acquiring, managing and transferring knowledge involves technology,
processes and people. These are considered the three pillars of knowl-
edge management. They are involved in knowledge management pro-
cesses and they serve both exploration and/or exploitation.


Alavi and Leidner (2001) framework of knowledge management
processes encompasses; a) knowledge creation, b) knowledge storage/
retrieval, c) knowledge transfer, and d) knowledge application, to
create value from the knowledge assets the firm possesses. Knowledge
management involves not only technical capabilities of managers and
workers, but also social networks to design, modify and execute work
flows thus enabling the free circulation of knowledge in internal pro-
cesses as well as to reach search engines to capture and apply external


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


2






knowledge (Rojas et al., 2017). The use of digitisation technologies
assists routines that support knowledge management practices within
industrial applications (Wilkesmann and Wilkesmann, 2018), thus, lit-
erature often relates knowledge management and Digitisation
(Cárdenas et al., 2018; Ilvonen et al., 2018; Shamim et al., 2017;
Wilkesmann and Wilkesmann, 2018). According to Schneider Electric
(2017) there are six main managerial challenges of digitisation: (1)
strategy and analysis, (2) planning and implementation, (3) coopera-
tion and networks, (4) business models, (5) human resources and (6)
change and leadership. To overcome these challenges firms must use a
combination of the three pillars of knowledge management: tech-
nology, processes and people.


In general, knowledge management relates to supply chain man-
agement by providing the tools necessary to manage large amounts of
data generated by supply chain operators and their customers (Carlos
et al., 2013; Dost et al., 2016; Olson, 2018; Pérez-Salazar et al., 2017;
Schoenherr et al., 2014). Supply chain management demands managers
to understand, monitor and control operations in the entire supply
chain, from sourcing, logistics, production and retail delivery to cus-
tomers (Olson, 2018). All these tasks involve managing knowledge not
only from the technology side through information systems
(Gunasekaran and Ngai, 2007) but also the quality of knowledge pro-
vided in the supply chain through data management and analytics
(Olson, 2018), regarding either tacit or explicit knowledge (Schoenherr
et al., 2014). As a result, knowledge management contributes to supply
chain performance (Dost et al., 2016; Schoenherr et al., 2014) since the
domains of knowledge management in supply chain management are
both intra- and inter-organisational (Carlos et al., 2013) allowing firms
to respond to internal and external stakeholder needs. While the role of
knowledge management in supply chain management is established in
current literature, the role of knowledge management as it relates to
digitisation has yet to be fully explored provided the recency of digital
technology in both areas of study. A general understanding is needed on
the digitisation eco-system.


Fig. 1, adapted from (Stroup, 2017) provides a general overview of
the defining characteristics of digitisation as well as the inter-
disciplinary nature of digitisation. While the figure is not all encom-
passing of the various technologies that exist, it provides a basic over-
view of the eco-system of digitisation and how it works toward not only
the proliferation of big data applications but also internal and external
stakeholder value. The technologies are separated into common fields
based on the review of literature conducted, however, many of these
technologies can be applied in different contexts and other fields.


Digitisation commonly referred to as internet of things (IOT) is


defined as, “intelligent production incorporated with the internet of
things, cloud technology and big data. With the ability to collect, share
and use information to make better decisions and be more productive
through decentralizing technology processes” (Stroup, 2017). What
distinguishes the new era of digitisation is the trend toward the de-
centralization of information sharing and automation. For example,
traditionally, actuators in manufacturing facilities would be connected
through a super computer which would directly send data to stations
independently. In the new digitisation environment, these actuators can
communicate directly with one another, bypassing the super computer
through sensor capabilities. Additionally data through sensors can be
collected and shared throughout the supply chain network via in-
formation technologies and systems such as cloud computing (Stroup,
2017). This trend toward not only the rapid and real time sharing of
information but also of automation has given rise to various other
technologies that can be controlled with minimal to no human inter-
vention. However, as seen through the definitions of these technologies,
while these technologies provide opportunities for data flow and in-
formation processing, the dissemination of knowledge is still a much-
needed consideration among scholars.


On the information systems side are the technologies that consist of:
cloud computing and blockchain. Cloud computing is a massively
scalable computing paradigm that offers software, infrastructure and
platforms as a service, providing real time data sharing capability
throughout the supply chain (Cao et al., 2017). Whereas blockchain
technology refers to incorruptible digital ledgers of transactions that are
programmed to record value of any type of transaction, allowing for a
secure and transparent form of sharing transactional data (Tapscott and
Tapscott, 2016; Underwood, 2016).


Other technologies have been developed not only for the aggrega-
tion and dissemination of large amounts of data but also to aid in
transportation/warehouse/and distribution management. Drones are
aerial vehicles that require no human pilot on board (Floreano and
Wood, 2015). Various applications exist in supply chain including
transportation of last-mile delivery as well as replacement for conveyor
systems in the warehouse. For individual drivers, autonomous vehicles
are any type of vehicle capable of utilizing sensors to detect environ-
mental changes rendering the capability of navigation without human
input (Gehrig and Stein, 1998). Companies like Uber have already in-
itiated the utilization of self-driving trucks to haul freight in Arizona.
While the current undertakings are a lower level of automation, Uber
has invested in implementation plans for higher level autonomous ve-
hicles (Bhuiyan, 2017).


From the warehouse management side, augmented reality (AR) is an
interactive digital experience of a real-world environment where ob-
jects are augmented by computer generated perceptual data which may
include visual, auditory, haptic, somatosensory and olfactory percep-
tions (Schuettel, 2017). Wearable devices are particularly becoming
more prevalent in warehouse management, where pickers now utilize
glasses which instruct where to pick, how much to pick and will record
this information.


Sensors that detect physical phenomenon (i.e. pressure, force, ac-
celeration, temperature, etc.) can convert data into an output typically
in the form of an electronic signal. Sensors are not only used in a
manufacturing environment, but now some freight contain sensors that
detects miles, miles per gallon, fuel, location, speed, etc. The digitisa-
tion of industry requires machines that are self-aware learning and
maintained. Where technologies actively suggest task arrangements and
adjust operational parameters to maximize quality (Feng and
Shanthikumar, 2018). The design of robotics is progressively improving
through developments like artificial intelligence. For example, the ex-
ternal communication between human beings averages approximately
10 bits per second, whereas robots can communicate at rates over one
gigabyte per second. Facets like machine learning and artificial in-
telligence are enhancing the uses of robotics. Machine learning is a
subset of artificial intelligence where computers are given the ability toFig. 1. Digital technologies.


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


3






progressively improve their performance on a task with data but
without the need for explicit programming (Michalski et al., 1984).
Finally from the production side are technologies like 3D printing and
reconfigurable manufacturing have the potential to greatly reduce lead
time and transportation costs throughout the supply chain
(Schniederjans, 2017). 3D Printing is the process in which material is
joined and solidified through computer aided design to create a three-
dimensional object. In addition reconfigurable manufacturing systems
are designed to accommodate rapid changes in structure (inclusive of
hardware and software components) in order to adjust to production
capacity and functionality which is capable of being altered by market
or an intrinsic system change (Koren et al., 1999).


All these technologies serve as a catalyst for greater dissemination of
information and big data analytics which have been applied to a variety
of supply chain problems in network design, risk management, in-
ventory management and retail. In general, the eco-system of digitisa-
tion has adjusted from being regarded as a connected network between
things to an extended connection between things, items and all stake-
holders contributing to the evolution of the business eco-system
through big data applications and greater amounts of information
(Rong et al., 2015). The enhanced connectivity and automation pro-
vided by digitisation continues to proliferate new supply chain appli-
cations and innovative practices for companies. However, the chal-
lenges persist without human intervention to adequately extract
knowledge from this connectivity. The importance of knowledge
management in the new era of digitisation is further solidified by stu-
dies like (Xue, 2014) who found that when an IT department is allo-
cated with more decision rights and has more business knowledge, then
knowledge creation capability drives the firm toward more strategic
risk which in turn results in operational and strategic benefits to the
firm. While previous research has been conducted on business appli-
cations in a variety of industries (Atzori et al., 2010; Karakostas, 1962;
Paschou et al., 2013; Turcu and Turcu, 2013) as well as security and
privacy (Kothmayr et al., 2013; Roman et al., 2013), digitisation lit-
erature is currently in its infancy, with scholarly and practitioner in-
terest but minimal insights into avenues to assess the importance of
industry- and field-applications as well as technologies and topics from
both a scholar and practitioner standpoint. Further, as knowledge
management is likely to enhance the benefits to a supply chain, ap-
plying knowledge management to the specific industry- and field-ap-
plications as well as technologies and topics will be necessary to ensure
optimization of supply chain digitisation.


3. Methodology


The research questions in this study seeks to assess first: what in-
dustry- and field-applications, technologies and topics in supply chain
digitisation are prevalent and growing among scholars and practi-
tioners? And further are there differences between the prevalence and
growth between scholars and practitioners? Finally, if there are dif-
ferences, from a knowledge management perspective, how can supply
chain scholars apply knowledge management to specific industry- and
field-applications, technologies and topics to benefit not only scholarly
research but practitioner insight? Thus, the most appropriate method to
use was content analysis of both scholarly publications and practitioner
news/video media. Content analysis is a research method that utilizes a
set of procedures in order to make valid inferences from textual (and/or
visual and auditory) data (Weber, 1990). Used as a means of describing
trends in communication content and comparing media or levels of
communication (Weber, 1990), content analysis was the most appro-
priate methodology for the research questions developed.


3.1. Data acquisition


3.1.1. Scholarly textual data
To address the first research question, a variant of the systematic


literature review proposed by Durach et al. (2015) was conducted on
scholarly publications as well as practitioner media. The units of ana-
lyses (scholarly publications in supply chain digitisation and practi-
tioner media in supply chain digitisation) required several sets of media
platform searches. A scholarly literature review search was performed
through ABI/INFORM Complete (ProQuest) and Academic Search
Complete (EBSCOhost) databases. A search string1 was initially devel-
oped by a co-author whose areas of expertise are in technology and
supply chain management. Later, two reference librarians helped to
refine the search string based on domain knowledge in the databases as
well as the topic. Further inclusion/exclusion criteria included: peer
reviewed articles in supply chain digitisation, (2) removal of predatory
journals as indicated on 2018 Beall's List of predatory journals and
publishers and (3) Removal of articles not written in the English lan-
guage. Further revisions to the search string were necessary to ensure a
focus on supply chain digitisation. Both reference librarians suggested
including a title search specifying supply chain keywords, as well as an
abstract and subject search on digitisation. This was the higher-level
exclusion criteria which significantly decreased the number of refer-
enced articles but ensured any article whose focus was not on supply
chain digitisation was removed from further consideration. Articles
were accessed from a period of January 2010–June 2018. Some of the
journals included: Decision Support Systems, Supply Chain Management:
An International Journal, Management Science, Operations Research, In-
ternational Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, In-
ternational Journal of Management and Information Systems, etc. A total of
52 academic articles on supply chain digitisation were utilized as a
basis for examining scholarly activity in supply chain digitisation.


3.1.2. Practitioner magazine textual data
Practitioner Magazines were utilized to gather textual data re-


presentative of the practitioner standpoint on supply chain digitisation.
Practitioner magazines including: Supply Chain Quarterly, Supply Chain
Management Review, DC Velocity, Inbound Logistics, Logistics Management,
Supply Chain Dive, Modern Materials Handing, TechCrunch, CIO Magazine,
InfoSecurity Group Magazine, Wired, Fast Company, and ComputerWorld
were accessed to obtain an interdisciplinary perspective of supply chain
digitisation (i.e. computer science and information technology per-
sonnel insights can provide a more broad understanding of how supply
chain digitisation fits into the larger inter-organisational network di-
gitized eco-system).


To ensure the focus on supply chain digitisation similar exclusion/
inclusion criteria to the scholarly textual data was also utilized. This
criterion included: (1) title on supply chain; topic/focus on digitisation
(2) company/practitioner focus (i.e. interviews with supply chain di-
gitisation implementations, specific company representatives, or talks
about a company implementing, using or considering supply chain di-
gitisation). (3) removal of any advertisements (4) removal of new
company announcements (5) removal of text not related to digitisation
(i.e. with large interviews with one question pertaining to supply chain
digitisation, only the textual data related to that question was kept).


This data was initially collected through a web scraper. This in-
cluded accessing the practitioner magazine websites and running the
web scraper code to collect data including: “title”, “date”, “author”,


1 “supply chains” OR “supply chain” OR “supply chain management” OR
“suppliers” OR “supply network” OR “logistical network” OR “demand chain”
OR “supply management” OR “reverse logistics” AND “Fourth industrial re-
volution” OR “smart factory” OR “Connected Enterprise” OR “Industrie 4.0″ OR
“Industry 4.0″ OR “smart industry” OR “smart manufacturing” OR “Industrial
internet” OR “re-industrialization” OR “Digitisation” OR “Digital” OR
“Digitisation” OR “Internet of things” OR “IoT” OR “location detection tech-
nologies” OR “location detection technology” OR “Advanced human-machine
interfaces” OR “fraud detection” OR “3D print” OR “additive manufacturing”
OR “smart sensors” OR “big data” OR “augmented reality” OR “cloud com-
puting".


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


4






“affiliation”, “main text”, and “abstract text”. Coding was altered based
on the layout type of each publication. A total of 353 practitioner
magazine articles on supply chain digitisation were utilized as a basis
for examining practitioner activity in supply chain digitisation.


3.1.3. Video textual data
Along with structured data (i.e. scholarly and practitioner magazine


articles), unstructured data (via video) was also utilized. It is suggested
up to 80% of the world's data are unstructured (Tachizawa et al., 2015),
which are currently underutilized in current research. Video data pro-
vides supplementary practitioner insight not only from different re-
presentatives within one company but also different thoughts (maybe
from a lower level employee) on supply chain digitisation.


Video data was collected through YouTube and Google Video with a
revised search string but with the same search criteria (i.e. title on
supply chain; topic focus: digitisation). In addition, our research ques-
tions focus on practitioner perspective required us to refine the video
inclusion/exclusion criteria to include (1) company/practitioner focus
(i.e. interviews with supply chain digitisation implementations, specific
company representatives, or talks about a company implementing,
using or considering supply chain digitisation): (2) removal of any
advertisements (3) removal musical only videos with just pictorial data
(i.e. no textual data) (3) videos without English subtitles.


Video data was collected by two graduate assistants and a co-au-
thor. Facets including: “title”, “date”, “author”, “affiliation”, “text” and
“summary” data when available were retrieved through YouTube and
Google Video. Textual data was collected by a main interface and closed
captioning, when available. Textual data was reviewed and subse-
quently adjusted by the co-author to ensure accuracy.


Data acquisition and subsequent cleansing of data occurred over a
seven-month period between January 2018–July 2018. Data was col-
lected and cleansed by one professor and two graduate student assis-
tants whose expertise lies in social media and supply chain manage-
ment. Table 1 presents the textual sources and inclusion/exclusion
criteria. A total of 74 videos on supply chain digitisation were utilized
as a basis for examining a supplementary viewpoint of practitioner
activity in supply chain digitisation.


3.2. Coding of data


Researchers coded the textual data in two stages (1) coding of the
scholarly data and (2) coding of the news/video data. For each stage:
independent coders tagged each document on (1) industry- and field-
applications, (2) technologies and (3) topics in supply chain digitisa-
tion. Coded classifications were first conducted through term fre-
quencies (i.e. “autonomous vehicles or self-driving cars” mentioned 49
times in article 1). Only frequencies above three mentions were utilized


to tag articles. These tags were then validated by reading through each
document. Any deletions (i.e. social responsibility was mentioned twice
but not related to supply chain digitisation) were recorded and then
checked for interrater agreement afterwards. Initial industry- and field-
applications, technologies and topics were informed by a 20%/80%
randomized split in (1) scholarly data and (2) practitioner data. That is
initial topics were developed through a thorough analysis of the 20%
and then subsequent industry- and field-applications as well as tech-
nologies and topics were added when the remaining 80% did not fit into
one category. Since the research question requires a comparison be-
tween the scholarly and practitioner data, the process only coded in-
dustry- and field-applications, technologies and topics that both sets of
data have in common. For example, some practitioner media focused on
journalism applications while the scholarly data did not, thus this was
not utilized for further comparison. Table 2A (Available in Appendix A)
provides the final list of 1) industry- and field-applications, (2) tech-
nologies and (3) topics in supply chain digitisation as well as sample
articles for each.


4. Analyses


To address the first research question of “what industry- and field-
applications, technologies and topics in supply chain digitisation are
prevalent and growing among scholar and practitioners, this study
presents data on the prevalence of (1) industry- and field-applications,
(2) technologies and (3) topics in supply chain digitisation as well as
how this has evolved over time in both scholarly publications and
news/video media. To address the differences between the prevalence
between scholars and practitioners a Mann Whitney U test is performed
iteratively to determine significant differences. The similarities and the
differences are accounted for in a model depicting “high vs. low” pre-
valence in both scholarly and practitioner publications. Following this
and utilizing a variant of the Croston method of forecasting linear ex-
ponential smoothing is applied to each set of data to determine growth
and decay in each (1) industry- and field-applications, (2) technologies
and (3) topics among both the scholarly publications and practitioner
media. This is then compared to account for differences in growth/


Table 1
Practitioner and scholarly publications sources, exclusion criteria and frequencies.


Type Sources Exclusion Criteria Frequencies


Practitioner publications
(Video)


YouTube; Google Video Advertisements, Non-English (without
English subtitles), No subtitles


Initial: 11,200
Company use and focus on digitisation: 360
Date Range: 340
Repeats on similar platforms: 120
English or Subtitles: 74


Practitioner Publication
(News)


Practitioner Magazines Advertisements, New Company
Announcements, Interviews


Initial: 143,222
Company use and focus on digitisation: 10,347 (title
summary search)
Date Range: 538
Repeats on similar platforms, advertisements, new
company announcements, interviews: 353


Scholarly Publications ABI/INFORM Complete (ProQuest) and
Academic Search Complete (EBSCOhost)
databases


Peer Reviewed Scholarly Publications;
Beall's list; English


Initial: 3,800
Peer Scholarly Publications: 1,546; Beall's List and English:
1080 Title and subject/abstract classifications and date
range: 52


Table 2
Growth rate comparison of technologies in different data sets.


Technology Practitioner publication growth
rate


Google trends growth
rate


IOT 410.85 158.73
Big Data 149.74 347.34
Augmented reality 111.20 245.20
Artificial intelligence 33.00 12.17
Blockchain 60.48 39.20


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


5






decay. These analyses will then finish addressing the first two research
questions. Finally, after comparing both prevalence and growth a final
model will be applied to knowledge management to help scholarly in-
sight into developing research questions to help addressing growing but
also limited research areas for supply chain digitisation.


4.1. Prevalence-scholarly publications


4.1.1. Industry- and field-applications
The prevalence of scholarly publications from 2010 to 2018 in-


dicates a proliferation of studies in industries including: healthcare,
aerospace, finance and humanitarian relief. Both food supply chain
(including agriculture) (10.20%), healthcare (8.16%) appeared to have
higher frequencies than any other industry which did not surpass 2.04%
of scholarly publications. These industries became particularly pre-
valent in 2017. Areas of interest in supply chain digitisation included
logistics/transportation (16.33%), manufacturing (12.24%), procure-
ment (6.12%), information systems and information technology (IS/IT)
(6.12%) and distribution (4.08%) were particularly prevalent. Areas
including procurement and IS/IT became more prevalent in 2013 and
continued into 2018. This was followed shortly by logistics/transpor-
tation which became more prevalent in 2014 as did distribution.
Manufacturing also became more prevalent in 2013 but diminished in
2017.


4.1.2. Technologies
From 2010 to 2018, the most prevalent technology discussed was


cloud computing (22.45%), which was particularly prevalent in
2011–2013. Many studies also focused on internet of things (IOT)
(38.78%) e-commerce (4.08%) or big data (16.33%) in general with
minimal focus on a technology or facet. This was common throughout
2011–2017. Other common technologies referenced were 3D printing
(6.12%), Sensors (4.08%) and radio frequency identification coupled
with big-data (2.04%). E-commerce was more prevalent in 2010 but has
since made a resurgence. 3D-printing became more prevalent in 2016.
Minimal research was found on other technologies or facets of tech-
nologies including: blockchain, artificial intelligence, drones, autono-
mous vehicles, augmented reality, or robotics.


4.1.3. Topics
Most scholarly publications included in this study reference poten-


tial benefits of utilizing the technology including economic, environ-
mental and social benefits for various stakeholders (38.78%) which
grew particularly in 2015–2018. This is followed by scholarly pub-
lication referencing social implications of utilizing such technology (i.e.
worker safety, impacts on jobs, customer wellbeing, etc.) which became
particularly prevalent in the latter part of 2011, decreased and then
came back in 2015. Following this is inter-organisational collaboration/
integration (18.37%), global and environmental impacts (both at
14.29%), digitisation problems/challenges (12.24%), and economic
implications (both at 4.08%). Other topics including company appli-
cations and mergers and acquisitions did not reach beyond 2.04%.


4.2. Prevalence- practitioner (news/video) publications


4.2.1. Industry- and field-applications
Similar to scholarly publications, the prevalence of practitioner


publications from 2010 to 2018 indicates food supply chain (including
agriculture) as the top industry (4.02%) which rapidly grew in 2014
and maintained in 2016 and 2017 and healthcare at 2.36%. Other
common industries included: textiles and courier (both at 1.89%),
electrical manufacturing (1.65%), finance and humanitarian (both at
1.18%). Other industries did not surpass 0.24%. Areas of interest in
supply chain digitisation included: logistics/transportation (25.77%),
manufacturing (8.27%), IS/IT (10.87%), strategy (6.62%), customer
relationship management (6.15%) and distribution and retail (both at


3.07%). Other areas of interest did not exceed 2.13%. Practitioner
publications in IS/IT lead the frequencies in 2010 and resurged in
2015–2016. During that time warehouse and procurement became
more popular in 2014.


4.2.2. Technologies
Dissimilar from scholarly publications, facets of technologies in-


cluding big data represented the most prevalent technology topic in
news/video literature (11.58%) which had an initial emergence in 2011
and increased to a large extent in 2015. Further, the majority of news/
video tended to focus on IOT rather than specific technologies
(51.77%). Following big data, was blockchain (8.98%) and closely
following was cloud computing (7.80%). E-commerce also was com-
monly discussed at 5.20% as was augmented reality (4.96%), artificial
intelligence (4.49%), and sensors (4.02%). At the lower end was 3D
printers (3.78%), autonomous vehicles and mobile applications (both at
3.55%), and robotics (3.07%). RFID and drones did not exceed more
than 1.18%. Most technologies had a larger emergence in 2015, except
for mobile applications which remained steady from 2010 to 2018.


4.2.3. Topics
Similar to the scholarly publications, most practitioner publications


included in this study reference potential benefits of utilizing the
technology (30.02%) which grew particularly in early 2014. Unlike the
scholarly publications, Economic implications followed shortly there-
after (23.17%). This was then followed by social implications (19.86%),
global implications and collaboration/integration (both at 15.37%),
company applications and future oriented discussions (both at 13.00%).
Challenges and environmental implications did not exceed 8.27%.
Benefits and future oriented discussion were especially prevalent in the
early years (i.e. 2011–2012) whereas other topics appeared to increase
in the early half of 2015.


4.3. Frequency analysis and model


Frequencies of each industry and field application, technologies and
topic were tabulated for both scholarly publications and news/video
publications. Since our study also addressed growth, summed fre-
quencies and percentages of those frequencies are utilized to rank and
conduct and iterative Mann-Whitney U test to determine significant
differences. This is done iteratively where we first determine similar
rankings between scholarly and news/video media (i.e. Food supply
chain both received the highest ranking of 1 for both scholarly and
news/video media), if the null hypothesis cannot be rejected (at a cri-
tical value of U as defined by the smallest of the U1 or U2 (at α= 0.05),
where


= +
+


U n n
n n


R1
( 1)


21 2
1 1


1 (1)


= +
+


U n n
n n


R2
( 1)


21 2
2 2


2 (2)


Where =U the lowest value of U or U n1 2, 1 is the number of each
industry and field application or technologies or topics in scholarly
publications and n2 is the number of each industry and field application,
or technologies, or topics in news/video publications, R1 represents the
sum of ranks in the scholarly publications, and R2 represents the sum of
ranks in the news/video publications. We utilize those industry- and
field-applications, technologies and topics and classify them into four
categorizations in the research model presented in Fig. 2, where (high,
high) refers to (scholarly publications ranked high/practitioner pub-
lications ranked high) and (low, low) refers to (scholarly publications
ranked low/practitioner publications ranked low). The significant dif-
ferences are then utilized to determine (high, low) vs. (low, high) ca-
tegorizations where (high low) refers to (scholarly publications ranked
high/practitioner publications ranked low) and (low, high) refers to


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


6






(scholarly publications ranked low/practitioner publications ranked
high). This was done for each industry and field application, technol-
ogies and topic categorization. At the two sided-level of significance
(α= 0.05), for the industry- and field-applications a critical value of
U≤ 75 was obtained for n1 and n2= 16. For the technologies a critical
value of U≤ 13 was obtained for n1 and n2= 8. For the topics, a
critical value of U≤5 was obtained for n1 and n2=6.


4.4. Growth-forecasting analysis


To adequately compare scholarly publications (which typically get
published either annually, bi-annually, or quarterly), dates of publica-
tion were collected and then condensed to reflect bi-annual frequencies.
Following this, a variant of the Croston method of forecasting which
accurately accounts for intermittency and obsolescence in data was
used to forecast growth into six period progressions. This variant, re-
ferred to as the linear exponential smoothing (LES) method (Prestwich
et al., 2014), is similar to hyperbolic exponential smoothing (HES) but
uses a different forecasting function to control the rate of the decay of
the data by adjusting . Specifically, LES applies single exponential
smoothing (SES) to generate smoothed estimates of t̂ by using the
formula,


= +ˆ (1 ) ˆt t t 1 (3)


where (0,1) is a smoothing parameter and observed values are in-
dicated by t . The forecast ft for LES utilizes the following formula,


=
>


+ =( )( )
f


if


if


, 0


1 , 0
t


t


t


ˆ
ˆ


ˆ
ˆ 2ˆ


t
t


t
t


t
t (4)


where +x demotes max x(0, ). During obsolescence forecasts will decay
to zero controlled by . When zero is reaches, this remains until further
nonzero periods occur.


LES was utilized after conducting a review of the data which con-
tained intermittent periods as well as some obsolescence. Provided the
findings of Prestwich et al. (2014) who compare LES with two other
Croston variants designed to adjust for obsolescence and intermittent
data (i.e. Teunter, Syntetos and Babai (TSB) method and HES) and
suggests it to be the best variant for handling obsolescence.


After forecasting the data into six periods, the growth is determined
through the formula,


= +Growth Rate
f


x 100t t
t


6


(5)


Where +ft 6 is the final (six period) forecasted value from the last
observed value t from the first half of 2018. Growth rates for each
industry and field application, technologies and topic were tabulated
for both scholarly publications and practitioner media. These were then
grouped according to four categorizations with NGD referring to “no
growth, decline”, (growth, growth), (growth, NGD), (NGD, growth),
and (NGD, NGD). The categorization of (growth, growth) indicates
growth in both scholarly and practitioner publications. The categor-
ization of (growth, NGD) indicates growth in scholarly publication and
no growth or decline in practitioner publications. The categorization of
(NGD, growth) indicates no growth or decline in scholarly publications
and growth in practitioner publications. Finally, the categorization of
(NGD, NGD) indicates no growth or decline in both scholarly and
practitioner publications.


4.5. Growth scholarly publications


4.5.1. Industry- and field-applications
Growth in scholarly publications was particularly prevalent in


scholarly healthcare publications (78.17%) followed by food supply
chains (12.91%). Areas covered included logistics/transportation
(50%), IS/IT, manufacturing, procurement and distribution (all
growing at an average rate of 25%), aeronautical increased by only
6.46%. Decreasing industry scholarly research included courier, elec-
trical manufacturing, textiles, energy, equipment automobile and che-
mical engineering and manufacturing (100%), humanitarian (32.39%),
and public service (3.68%). Fields including strategy, CRM, retail and
warehouse management showed no growth.


4.5.2. Technologies
From 2010 to 2018, IoT is forecasted to increase 164.66%. With


specific areas including big data (20.9%) and cloud computing
(64.44%) to increase. Technologies like augmented reality, block chain,
autonomous vehicles, robotics, artificial intelligence and drones have
yet to emerge and thus project forward. Additionally, e-commerce,
mobile applications, and 3D printing were projected to decrease over
time.


4.5.3. Topics
All supply chain digitisation topics were projected to increase at a


steady rate 25% this included: benefits, global issues, future transfor-
mation, company applications, challenges, economic impacts, as well as
social and environmental implications. The only topic that was set to
gradually increase by 6.58% was collaboration and mergers and ac-
quisitions.


4.6. Growth news/video practitioner publications


4.6.1. Industry- and field-applications
Similar to scholarly publications, food/agriculture (60.22%) and


healthcare (13.56%) were both set to increase. However, growth was
also indicated for public service (42.49%) followed by finance
(13.56%), courier (8.56%), electrical manufacturing (6.42%) and by a
slight amount humanitarian relief (0.05%). Unlike scholarly data, an
industry that was projected to decline included aeronautical en-
gineering (−21.82%). However, industries including chemical manu-
facturing (36.58%) automobile manufacturing (−27.40%), energy
(−22.62%), equipment manufacturing (−22.61%) were all forecasted
to decrease. All areas were set to increase to differing degrees. The
largest area was logistics/transportation at 92.1% increased followed
by IS/IT (39.95%), strategy (38.13%), CRM (34.42%), retail (27.14%),
manufacturing, procurement, distribution (all at 25%) and warehouse
management at 13.32%.


Fig. 2. Prevalence of industry- and field-applications, topics and technologies.


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


7






4.6.2. Technologies
From 2010 to 2018, practitioner publications dealing with IoT


(410.85%), big data (149.74%) and cloud computing (91.72%) were all
projected to increase to a large extent. Also similar to scholarly data
drones (−12.09%) were projected to decrease. Unlike scholarly data,
technologies including augmented reality (111.20%) was set to increase
by a substantial amount. Followed by sensors (72.13%), mobile appli-
cations (66.68%), blockchain (60.48%), robotics (48.57%), autono-
mous vehicles (45.94%), E-commerce (41.44%), artificial intelligence
(33%), ad 3D printing (27.95%) were projected to grow.


4.6.3. Topics
The topics of supply chain digitisation in practitioner publications


followed a similar trajectory as scholarly publications. Except for col-
laboration/integration and mergers and acquisitions (0%), all topics
were expected to grow to varying degrees. Benefits surpassed all topics
with 125.67% growth. Followed by global implications (57.03%),
company applications (54.88%), challenges (53.60%), social implica-
tions (41.77%), economic implications (39.35%) and environmental
implications (30.7%). Fig. 3 depicts the delineated categories and the
industries/fields, technologies and topics within these categorizations.


4.7. Comparison of prevalence and growth


Fig. 4, presents the consolidated models of Figs. 2 and 3. Specifi-
cally, Fig. 4 identifies the similarities between growth and prevalence
among industry, technology and topic. It identifies which topics, tech-
nologies and industries are growing and prevalent from a practitioner
and scholarly perspective. However, it goes a step further by also
identifying what industries, technologies and topics are growing and
prevalent among practitioners but not growing and prevalent among
scholars for the purpose of identifying what is currently weak in the
scholarly arena. Therefore, this figure addresses the final research
question of this paper, from a knowledge management perspective, how
can supply chain scholars apply knowledge management to specific
industry- and field-applications, technologies and topics to benefit not
only scholarly research but practitioner insight.


A sensitivity analysis was performed on the technologies presented
in Fig. 4 to determine the efficacy of growth in each technology. This
was done utilizing a google trends search, where the technology key-
word was utilized and searched on google trends from January
2010–June 2018. Search data was then downloaded, where we com-
bined the monthly data to bi-annual and utilized the Holt's technique to
project six periods into the future. The Holt's method was utilized based
on the differences in the data. Growth rates were then computed and
compared. Although the growth rates varied (i.e. due to a combination
of scholarly and practitioner interest), similar growth rates were found
between the practitioner-oriented data in prevalence and growth.
Table 2 presents these statistics.


5. Results


In a context of technological evolution that supports digitisation of
industry, the traditional Knowledge Pyramid (Ackoff, 1989) suffered an
enlargement to incorporate the origin of the building blocks for data,
subsequent information and later knowledge, resulting in organisa-
tional actionable intelligence (Jennex, 2017). The available sensors
allow us to collect and analyze internal and external realities and
generate data, therefore the roots of data are digitalized. Considering
such context, we apply the knowledge management approach by Alavi
and Leidner (2001) to supply chain digitisation and propose an in-
tegrative approach to enhance the benefits of digitisation for supply
chain management. Although the specific issues of industries are not
accounted for generalization's sake, we offer an integrative model in
Fig. 5 to highlight the supply chain digital optimization contribution to
organisational digital performance and benefits through the use of
knowledge management.


Considering the proposed integrated approach and the reported


Fig. 3. Growth of industry- and field-applications, topics and technologies.


Fig. 4. Industry and field application, topics and technologies for scholarly attention.


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


8






industry applications, technologies and topics for practitioner and
scholarly attention, we suggest insights and questions for future re-
search to apply knowledge management in support the supply chain
digitisation.


The research questions in Table 4 are based on the framework
presented in Table 3 which is combined with the findings presented in
Fig. 4. Provided concerns about substantial job losses and the related
decline of supply chain management as a field (Lyall et al., 2018), the
research questions presented in Table 4 detail the application of
knowledge management for the purpose of enhancing supply chain
digital performance. Specifically, these questions can be utilized to
further support socialization and human level engagement through
knowledge management for the purpose of enhancing supply chain
digital performance (Corso et al., 2010).


We summarize our proposed questions from three perspectives: in-
dustry, technology, and management. From an industry perspective,
research in knowledge management and industry digitisation is typi-
cally studied in health industries (Barata et al., 2018) particularly ad-
dressing tacit and explicit knowledge challenges (Al-Karaghouli et al.,
2013). However, this research is analyzed at the technology- and pro-
cess-level rather than the individual-level (Lombardi et al., 2015). As a
result, we specify research questions that focus on the human require-
ments and consequences of knowledge management use in supply chain


digitisation as they relate to health industries. Even in non-intensive
knowledge management industries (i.e. food industries), we see evi-
dence of digitisation having a potential to support socialization and
engagement for the purposes of sharing tacit knowledge (Curado and
Bontis, 2011; Corso et al., 2010). Thus, one of our questions calls for
research assessing the use of digital technologies in improving supply
chain network performance in the food/agricultural industries.


From a technology perspective, we focus our questions on how
technology might be able to address large-scale problems and facilitate
supply chain performance through knowledge management capability.
Specifically, IoT in literature has been associated with helping to solve
issues in information asymmetry (i.e., differing information processing
capabilities between suppliers and buyers) as well as complexity in
information (i.e., where suppliers do not understand how to manage
information in order to engage in customization) (Ng et al., 2015).
Thus, some of our proposed questions focus on the implications of IoT
in increasing/decreasing knowledge among personnel. Another ex-
ample is in blockchain implications towards cyber security. Future re-
search might even reference the theory knowledge creation proposing
how blockchain moves the knowledge from socialization to ex-
ternalization to combination and then to internalization (Nonaka,
1994). Referencing knowledge management theory, questions per-
taining to the role of blockchain in cybersecurity and how knowledge
management can facilitate this process is likely to foster greater insight
for the technology itself.


Regarding managerial issues, according to industry experts and
academics (Schneider, 2018) combining practical and scholarly im-
portance of challenges of Digitisation should result in high impact re-
search further exploring: a) creating conditions for acceptance for
change; b) building digital capabilities; c) developing new business
models, and d) providing implications for future business models as
they relate to knowledge management. These topics reflect the need of
several combinations of the three pillars of knowledge management:
technology, processes and people. Hence, research on knowledge
management should provide a lens for designing and implementing the
requested solutions. Supply chain knowledge management capability
(knowledge acquisition, conversion, application and protection within
the supply chain) contributes to knowledge in the supply chain (both
tacit and explicit) and enhances the supply chain performance. Future
research in knowledge management as it relates to supply chain digi-
tisation helps to foster a greater understanding of the human role in
supply chain digitisation.


6. Discussion and conclusion


In this study, content analysis was carried out to collect and inter-
pret textual data from scholars and practitioners to validate the itera-
tion of different applications of industry and field, technologies and
topics. Statistical analyses were performed to determine significant
differences between the frequencies and growth of supply chain digi-
tisation industry/field applications, technologies and topics in scholarly
and practitioner-oriented literature. Finally, a comparison was made to
consider the differences in prevalence as well as growth/decay to derive
future research inquiries that relate to the utilization of knowledge
management in supply chain digitisation.


Fig. 5. Proposed integrated approach for supply chain digitisation and knowl-
edge management (Adopted from (Cárdenas et al., 2018; Wilkesmann and
Wilkesmann, 2018)).


Table 3
Alavi and Leidner (2001) Basic concepts.


Knowledge Perspective Role of Digitisation


1 Knowledge vis-à-vis data and information (personalized information) Help the user assimilate information
2 State-of-mind (knowing/understanding) Provide access to sources of knowledge
3 Object (object to be stored/manipulated) Gathering, storing, and transferring knowledge
4 Process (applying expertise) Provide Link among sources of knowledge (depth/breadth)
5 Access to Information (condition of access to information) Provide effective search and retrieval for locating relevant information
6 Capability (potential to influence action) Enhance intellectual capital by supporting development of org. competencies


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


9






To address the first question (i.e. what industry- and field-applica-
tions, technologies and topics in supply chain digitisation are prevalent
and growing among scholars and practitioners), we looked at pre-
valence as well as growth. To do this, a variant of the Croston method of
forecasting was utilized for intermittency and obsolescence in data to
forecast growth (Prestwich et al., 2014). This method was applied after
conducting a review of the data which included intermittent periods
and some obsolescence as well. Our analyses show that healthcare and
food supply chain (including agriculture) are the most prevalent in-
dustries and logistics/transportation and CRM are the most prevalent
topics considered in both scholarly and practitioner’ publications. Ad-
ditionally, the most prevalent technologies include IoT and big data. In
terms of growth, our analyses show growth in such industries and field
applications as: food/agriculture, healthcare, logistics and transporta-
tion, IS/IT, manufacturing, procurement, and distribution. Technolo-
gies including IoT, big data and cloud computing continue to see
growth in the coming years. Additionally, areas of growth are expected
in such topics as benefits derived from the technologies, global issues,
future, applications, challenges, collaborative and economic implica-
tions as well as social and environmental issues involved in a shift to-
ward supply chain digitisation.


In addressing the second question, (i.e. are there differences be-
tween the prevalence and growth between scholars and practitioners?),
our analyses see distinct differences in the prevalence and growth in
industry, technologies and topics among the practitioner and scholarly
communities. Specifically, block chain, artificial intelligence and aug-
mented reality tended towards high levels of prevalence among prac-
titioners and low levels among scholars. This was also true in growth.
Additionally, while practitioners are expected to continue to apply
these technologies to such industries as courier, electrical, strategy and
retail, the scholarly community does not appear to show much potential
for growth in these industries.


To address the third research question (i.e. how can supply chain
scholars apply knowledge management to specific industry- and field-
applications, technologies and topics in order to benefit not only
scholarly research but practitioner insight?), the two models presented


in Figs. 2 and 3 were then compared and combined to obtain a con-
ception of industries, technologies and topics that were both growing
and prevalent among scholars as well as those areas that have shown
growth and prevalence among practitioners but not scholars. In this
sense, a framework was offered to develop research questions that can
be used to reflect how supply chain management and knowledge can
combine to create a new paradigm reflecting the benefits of digitisation
while mitigating the social concerns often plaguing supply chain digi-
tisation (i.e. potential loss of jobs). While this framework provides
fundamental insights on future areas of inquiry, we are not suggesting
that research should ignore the industries, technologies and topics in
the (not prevalent/no growth/decline) categorization. For example,
there is much insight to be made on drones as well as the applications in
the automotive industry, textile industry etc. This study simply im-
plores researchers to assess certain areas that have yet to be fully ex-
plored as the next decade will likely see tremendous advancements in
our understanding of how knowledge management and digitisation
influences supply chain digital performance.


Acknowledgement


The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from FCT-
Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (Portugal), national funding
through research grant UID/SOC/04521/2019.


References


Ackoff, R.L., 1989. From data to wisdom. J. Appl. Syst. Anal. 16 (1), 3–9. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207543.2013.849827.


Al-Karaghouli, W., Ghoneim, A., Sharif, A., Dwivedi, Y.K., 2013. The effect of knowledge
management in enhancing the procurement process in the UK healthcare supply
chain. Inf. Syst. Manag. 30 (1), 35–49. https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2013.
739888.


Alavi, M., Leidner, D.E., 2001. Knowledge management and knowledge management
systems: conceptual foundations and research issues. MIS Q. 107–136.


Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., 2010. The internet of things: a survey. Comput. Network.
54 (15), 2787–2805.


Barata, J., Rupino Da Cunha, P., Stal, J., 2018. Mobile supply chain management in the
Industry 4.0 era. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 31 (1), 173–192. https://doi.org/10.1108/


Table 4
Research questions.


Alavi and Leidner knowledge perspective
(2001)


Suggested research inquiries


1 1. In what ways does IOT improve and/or worsen transparency within a supply chain network as it relates to data/information/
knowledge exchange?
2. To what degree does the application of IOT/Blockchain/big data increase or decrease the transfer of knowledge within
healthcare supply chains? And does this impact supply chain performance?


2 1. How does blockchain affect security and safety of patient medical records? And how might knowledge management and supply
chain personnel protect patient rights?
2. What are the downsides of IOT use in electrical manufacturing? And how might human tacit knowledge help to decrease these
issues?


3 1. How can supply chain management professionals leverage the innovative use of knowledge management applications supported
by digital technologies (including but not limited to augmented reality) to attract and retain logistics/transportation talent?
2. Does big data through IOT impact knowledge creation in retail healthcare for the purpose of increasing return on investment?


4 1. How can knowledge management affect integration among supply chain internal and external stakeholders to optimize value
creation and mitigate problems associated with blockchain implementation?
2. As retailers look to combine their online presence with physical stores, how can knowledge management foster the initial
collection and dissemination of data into knowledge for customer and supplier value creation?


5 1. How can artificial intelligence/augmented reality help to accelerate and/or simplify digital supply chain integration in logistics/
transportation?
2. How can knowledge management contribute to the maturity of the demand-driven value network through both intra- and inter-
organisational domain of knowledge management allowing firms to respond to internal and external stakeholders' needs? And how
might personnel knowledge foster this relationship?


6 1. How can knowledge management be integrated with supply chain processes (including but not limited to customer/supplier
relationship management, demand management, order fulfillment, product development and returns management) to optimize the
use of technologies involving artificial intelligence/augmented reality to improve supply chain network performance in the food/
agricultural industry?
2. How can logistics/transportation evoke an intrapreneurial spirit among employees and foster an ability to keep pace with the
technological and business changes brought about through supply chain digitisation?
3. How can knowledge management be applied by leadership to support the convergence of the digital and physical supply chains
and foster internal and external stakeholder value creation in supply chain networks?


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


10



https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2013.849827

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2013.849827

https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2013.739888

https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2013.739888

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref4

https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-09-2016-0156




JEIM-09-2016-0156.
Bhuiyan, J., 2017. Uber's Autonomous Cars Drove 20,354 Miles and Had to Be Taken over


at Every Mile, According to Documents - Recode. Retrieved. from. https://www.
recode.net/2017/3/16/14938116/uber-travis-kalanick-self-driving-internal-metrics-
slow-progress, Accessed date: 22 October 2018.


Cao, Q., Schniederjans, D.G., Schniederjans, M., 2017. Establishing the use of cloud
computing in supply chain management. Oper. Manag. Res. 10 (1–2), 47–63.


Cárdenas, L.J.A., Ramírez, W.F.T., Rodríguez Molano, J.I., 2018. Model for the
Incorporation of Big Data in Knowledge Management Oriented to Industry 4.0.
Springer, Cham, pp. 683–693. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93803-5_64.


Carlos, A., Maçada, G., Cristina Costa, J., Oliveira, M., Curado, C., 2013. Information
management and knowledge sharing in supply chains operating in Brazil. Int. J.
Automot. Technol. Manag. 13 Retrieved from. https://s3.amazonaws.com/
academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_
sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&
Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&
response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_
and_knowledge_sha.pdf.


Cepeda Carrión, G., Luis Galán González, J., Leal, A., 2004. Identifying key knowledge
area in the professional services industry: a case study. J. Knowl. Manag. 8 (6),
131–150. https://doi.org/10.1108/13673270410567684.


Choi, H., Varian, H., 2012. Predicting the present with google trends. Econ. Rec. 88, 2–9.
Corso, M., Dogan, S.F., Mogre, R., Perego, A., 2010. The role of knowledge management


in supply chains: evidence from the Italian food industry. Int. J. Netw. Virtual Organ.
7 (2–3), 163–183.


Cui, R., Gallino, S., Moreno, A., Zhang, D.J., 2017. The Operational Value of Social Media
Information. Prod. Oper. Manag.


Curado, C., Bontis, N., 2011. Parallels in knowledge cycles. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27 (4),
1438–1444. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHB.2010.09.011.


Dost, B., Rehman, C.A., Commer, P.J., Sci, S., Khyzer, M., 2016. Significance of knowl-
edge management practices effecting supply chain performance. Pak. J. Commer.
Soc. Sci. 10 Retrieved from. http://jespk.net/publications/330.pdf.


Durach, C.F., Wieland, A., Machuca, J.A.D., 2015. Antecedents and dimensions of supply
chain robustness: a systematic literature review. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag.
45 (1/2), 118–137.


Feng, Q., Shanthikumar, J.G., 2018. How research in production and operations man-
agement may evolve in the era of big data. Prod. Oper. Manag. 27 (9), 1670–1684.


Floreano, D., Wood, R.J., 2015. Science, technology and the future of small autonomous
drones. Nature 521 (7553), 460.


Gehrig, S.K., Stein, F.J., 1998. A trajectory-based approach for the lateral control of car
following systems. In: In: Systems, Man, Cybernetics (Eds.), IEEE International
Conference on, vol. 4. IEEE, pp. 3596–3601 1998. 1998.


Goel, S., Hofman, J.M., Lahaie, S., Pennock, D.M., Watts, D.J., 2010. Predicting consumer
behavior with Web search. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.


Guha, S., Kumar, S., 2018. Emergence of big data research in operations management,
information systems, and healthcare: past contributions and future roadmap. Prod.
Oper. Manag. 27 (9), 1724–1735.


Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W.T., 2007. Knowledge management in 21st century manu-
facturing. Int. J. Prod. Res. 45 (11), 2391–2418. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207540601020429.


Ilvonen, I., Thalmann, S., Manhart, M., Sillaber, C., 2018. Reconciling digital transfor-
mation and knowledge protection: a research agenda. Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 16
(2), 235–244. https://doi.org/10.1080/14778238.2018.1445427.


Jennex, M., 2017. Re-examining the jennex olfman knowledge management success
model. Retrieved from. https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/
41691.


Karakostas, B., 1962. A DNS architecture for the internet of things: a case study in
transport logistics. Procedia Computer Science 34 (4), 594–601. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.PROCS.2013.06.079.


Koren, Y., Heisel, U., Jovane, F., Moriwaki, T., Pritschow, G., Ulsoy, G., Van Brussel, H.,
1999. Reconfigurable manufacturing systems. CIRP Annals 48 (2), 527–540.


Kothmayr, T., Schmitt, C., Hu, W., Brünig, M., Carle, G., 2013. DTLS based security and
two-way authentication for the Internet of Things. Ad Hoc Netw. 11 (8), 2710–2723.


Lombardi, S., Giustiniano, L., Cavaliere, V., 2015. Organizational creativity in multi-
national companies: knowledge collecting, ICT use and top management support.
Retrieved from. https://iris.luiss.it/handle/11385/147257#.W8qw70tKhPY.


Lyall, A., Gstettner, S., Mercier, P., 2018. The death of supply chain management. Harv.
Bus. Rev. 49 (3), 1–5.


March, J.G., 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organ. Sci. 2
(1), 71–87. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2.1.71.


Michalski, R.S., Carbonell, J.G., Mitchell, T.M., 1984. Machine Learning: an Artificial
Intelligence Approach. Springer Science & Business Media.


Ng, S.C.H., Rungtusanatham, J.M., Zhao, X., Lee, T.S., 2015. Examining process man-
agement via the lens of exploitation and exploration: Reconceptualization and scale
development. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 163, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2015.01.
021.


Nonaka, Byosière, Toyama, 2003. A Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation:
Understanding the Dynamic Process of Creating Knowledge. Handbook of
Organizational Learning & Knowledge.


Nonaka, I., 1994. A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organ. Sci. 5
(1), 14–37. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.5.1.14.


Olson, D.L., 2018a. View of IJPR contributions to knowledge management in supply
chains. Int. J. Prod. Res. 56 (1–2), 733–742. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2017.1398427.


Olson, R., 2018b. Don't Be Such a Scientist: Talking Substance in an Age of Style. Island
Press.


Paschou, M., Sakkopoulos, E., Sourla, E., Tsakalidis, A., 2013. Health Internet of Things:
metrics and methods for efficient data transfer. Simul. Model. Pract. Theory 34,
186–199.


Pérez-Salazar, M. del R., Aguilar Lasserre, A.A., Cedillo-Campos, M.G., Hernández
González, J.C., González, J.C.H., 2017. The role of knowledge management in supply
chain management: a literature review. J. Ind. Eng. Manag. 10 (4), 711. https://doi.
org/10.3926/jiem.2144.


Polanyi, M., 1962. Tacit knowing: its bearing on some problems of philosophy. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 34 (4), 601–616. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.34.601.


Prestwich, S., Tarim, A., Rossi, R., Hnich, B., 2014. Intermittency and Obsolescence: a
Croston Method with Linear Decay. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:1409.1609.


Rojas, R., Morales, V.J., Sánchez, E., Jiménez, A.E., 2017. El aprendizaje colaborativo en
la docencia sobre empresa. Dialnet 235–235. Retrieved from. https://dialnet.
unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=6274710.


Roman, R., Zhou, J., Lopez, J., 2013. On the features and challenges of security and
privacy in distributed internet of things. Comput. Network. 57 (10), 2266–2279.


Rong, K., Hu, G., Lin, Y., Shi, Y., Guo, L., 2015. Understanding business ecosystem using a
6C framework in Internet-of-Things-based sectors. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 159, 41–55.


Schneider Electric, 2017. IoT EcoStruxureTM Ensures Efficiency for CNBM - YouTube.
Retrieved. from. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zV7l-wavtCA, Accessed
date: 20 October 2018.


Schneider, P., 2018. Managerial challenges of Industry 4.0: an empirically backed re-
search agenda for a nascent field. Review of Managerial Science 12 (3), 803–848.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-018-0283-2.


Schniederjans, D.G., 2017. Adoption of 3D-printing technologies in manufacturing: a
survey analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 183, 287–298.


Schoenherr, T., Griffith, D.A., Chandra, A., 2014. Intangible capital, knowledge and new
product development competence in supply chains: process, interaction and con-
tingency effects among SMEs. Int. J. Prod. Res. 52 (16), 4916–4929. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207543.2014.894258.


Schuettel, P., 2017. The Concise Fintech Compendium. School of Management Fribourg/
Switzerland, Fribourg.


Shamim, S., Cang, S., Yu, H., Li, Y., Shamim, S., Cang, S., et al., 2017. Examining the
feasibilities of industry 4.0 for the hospitality sector with the lens of management
practice. Energies 10 (4), 499. https://doi.org/10.3390/en10040499.


Stroup, J., 2017. Industry 4.0 • A Brief History - YouTube. Retrieved. from. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCswJIdVoXk, Accessed date: 20 October 2018.


Tachizawa, E.M., Alvarez-Gil, M.J., Montes-Sancho, M.J., 2015. How “smart cities” will
change supply chain management. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 20 (3), 237–248.


Tapscott, D., Tapscott, A., 2016. Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology behind
Bitcoin Is Changing Money, Business, and the World. Penguin.


Turcu, C.E., Turcu, C.O., 2013. Internet of things as key enabler for sustainable healthcare
delivery. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 73, 251–256.


Underwood, S., 2016. Blockchain beyond bitcoin. Commun. ACM 59 (11), 15–17.
Weber, R.P., 1990. Basic Content Analysis, vol. 49 Sage.
Wilkesmann, M., Wilkesmann, U., 2018. Industry 4.0 – organizing routines or innova-


tions? VINE J. Inf. Knowl. Manag. Syst. 48 (2), 238–254. https://doi.org/10.1108/
VJIKMS-04-2017-0019.


Xue, L., 2014. Governance–knowledge fit and strategic risk taking in supply chain digi-
tisation. Decis. Support Syst. 62, 54–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2014.03.
003.


Yang, Y., Pan, B., Song, H., 2014. Predicting hotel demand using destination marketing
organization's web traffic data. J. Travel Res. 53 (4), 433–447.


D.G. Schniederjans, et al. International Journal of Production Economics 220 (2020) 107439


11



https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-09-2016-0156

https://www.recode.net/2017/3/16/14938116/uber-travis-kalanick-self-driving-internal-metrics-slow-progress

https://www.recode.net/2017/3/16/14938116/uber-travis-kalanick-self-driving-internal-metrics-slow-progress

https://www.recode.net/2017/3/16/14938116/uber-travis-kalanick-self-driving-internal-metrics-slow-progress

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref7

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93803-5_64

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/43458566/Information_management_and_knowledge_sha20160307-9605-1sb2cyc.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1540011812&Signature=Aa7EnY2Bv20058ch7CbZenQkjik%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3Bfilename%3DInformation_management_and_knowledge_sha.pdf

https://doi.org/10.1108/13673270410567684

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref13

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHB.2010.09.011

http://jespk.net/publications/330.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref21

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540601020429

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540601020429

https://doi.org/10.1080/14778238.2018.1445427

https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/41691

https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/41691

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROCS.2013.06.079

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROCS.2013.06.079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref27

https://iris.luiss.it/handle/11385/147257#.W8qw70tKhPY

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref29

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2.1.71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref31

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2015.01.021

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2015.01.021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref34

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.5.1.14

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1398427

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1398427

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref38

https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.2144

https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.2144

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.34.601

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref41

https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=6274710

https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=6274710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref44

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zV7l-wavtCA

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-018-0283-2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref47

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2014.894258

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2014.894258

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref49

https://doi.org/10.3390/en10040499

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCswJIdVoXk

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCswJIdVoXk

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref56

https://doi.org/10.1108/VJIKMS-04-2017-0019

https://doi.org/10.1108/VJIKMS-04-2017-0019

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2014.03.003

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2014.03.003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30249-X/sref59


