









Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Digital Communications and Networks


journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/dcan

Recent advances in Industrial Internet: insights and challenges


Wei Qin, Siqi Chen, Mugen Peng *


State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China

A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Industrial Internet
Reference architectures
Cloud computing
Mobile edge computing
Fog computing

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: qinwei75@bupt.edu.cn (W. Qi


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001
Received 24 April 2019; Received in revised form
Available online 10 July 2019
2352-8648/© 2020 Chongqing University of Posts a
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/b

A B S T R A C T


The Industrial Internet is a promising technology combining industrial systems with Internet connectivity to
significantly improve the product efficiency and reduce production cost by cooperating with intelligent devices, in
which the advanced computing, big data analysis and intelligent perception techniques have been involved. This
paper comprehensively surveys the recent advances of the Industrial Internet, including reference architectures,
key technologies, relative applications and future challenges. Reference architectures which have been proposed
for different application scenarios and their corresponding characteristics are summarized. Key technologies, such
as cloud computing, mobile edge computing, fog computing, which are classified according to different layers in
the architecture, are presented to support a variety of applications in the Industrial Internet. Meanwhile, future
challenges and research trends are discussed as well to promote further research of the Industrial Internet.

1. Introduction


Nowadays, new production and organization methods promote the
intelligent transformation of the global industrial system, with the rapid
development of new information technologies, such as the Internet, big
data, cloud computing, Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence.
As a result, the Industrial Internet comes into being and integrates the
advantages of both the Industrial Revolution and the Internet Revolution.


In the recent few years, the Industrial Internet has become the focus of
governments, manufacturing enterprises, operators and academic
research groups from various fields in different countries. The General
Electric (GE) proposed the convergence of industrial equipment and In-
formation Technology (IT) in 2012.


The concept of “Industrial Internet” was defined for the first time,
namely, to connect equipment, people and data analysis based on an
open, global network [1]. The objective of the concept is to upgrade the
intelligence of aviation, medical and other industrial equipments, reduce
energy consumption and improve efficiency through the use and analysis
of big data. In June 2013, GE proposed the concept of Industrial Internet
Revolution, providing operation and maintenance services for a large
number of industrial applications, and using key technologies such as the
Internet and big data to improve the quality of service. Then, in order to
apply the concept of Industrial Internet to practical application scenarios,
five leading industrial companies in the United States, including AT&T,
Cisco, GE, IBM and Intel, established the Industrial Internet Consortium
(IIC). The goal of IIC is to break down technical barriers and promote the

n), pmg@bupt.edu.cn (M. Peng).


2 July 2019; Accepted 4 July 201


nd Telecommunications. Publishi
y-nc-nd/4.0/).

integration of the physical world and digital world. As a result, the In-
dustrial Internet will produce innovative industrial products and systems
in smart manufacturing, healthcare, transportation, and other fields. IIC
published the Industrial Internet Reference Architecture (IIRA) v.1.8 in
2017. The IIRA provides standards-based architectural template and
methodology so that the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) system ar-
chitects could design their own systems based on a common framework
and concept.


The Industrial Internet has attracted worldwide attention, thus
developing the Industrial Internet has become a common choice for most
industrial powers for future opportunities and challenges. The German
government issued the strategy of Industry 4.0, which is consistent with
the essence of the Industrial Internet. The Industry 4.0 is known as the
fourth industrial revolution, focusing on the establishment of intelligent
products and production processes. The term refers to a large range of
different concepts, including smart factory, self-organization, and Cyber
Physical Systems (CPSs). A generally accepted viewpoint is that the In-
dustry 4.0 is the technical integration and application of CPSs. CPS is
defined as a system integrating physical worlds and computational ca-
pabilities that can interact humans through many new information
technologies [2]. The CPS focuses on the close integration and coordi-
nation of physical resources and computing resources, and is mainly used
in some intelligent systems. The underlying concept of the term CPS is
that it refers to embedded systems, logistics, coordination and manage-
ment processes that utilize sensors to directly access physical information
and actuators to perform physical processes [3]. The Industry 4.0

9


ng Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an



mailto:qinwei75@bupt.edu.cn

mailto:pmg@bupt.edu.cn

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001&domain=pdf

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/23528648

http://www.keaipublishing.com/dcan

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001




Fig. 1. Structure of the paper.


W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

proposes to build a CPS platform based on services and real-time support,
and conducts research on technology, business and policy to build a
Cyber Physical Production System (CPPS) lab.


The Chinese government has proposed strategies to promote the deep
integration of informatization and industrialization, and accelerate the
development of advanced manufacturing and economy. In 2016, the
Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII) was founded in China, aiming at
establishing a public platform for collaborated improvement in admin-
istration, industry and academy. The AII redefined the Industrial Internet
as the industry and application ecology formed by the deep integration of
the Internet, new information technologies and industrial systems.
Meanwhile, Japan stresses the Connected Industries as a supplement to
the Industrial Internet, creating new added value and solutions to various
problems in society through the interconnection of enterprises, people,
data and machines.


Recently, the Industrial Internet is considering using the ideas of
embedded technology and intelligent objects in the IoT. The term “IoT” is
considered as the ultimate global network of interconnected intelligent
objects through extended Internet technologies, which are supported by
a set of technologies, including Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID),
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN), controllers, machine-to-machine
communication devices, etc. The Industrial Internet has been drawing
on these technologies to involve increasing numbers of smart objects, and
then it will provide promising opportunities to build powerful industrial
systems and develop various industrial applications. In addition to the
IoT, various technologies are needed to support the Industrial Internet,
including network communication technology, wireless sensing, cloud
computing technology, industrial big data technology and information
security. As a kind of interdisciplinary science and integrated technology,
the Industrial Internet continues to integrate with emerging technologies,
such as edge computing, artificial intelligence, blockchain technology,
etc.


The Industrial Internet has rapidly emerged on a global scale with the
rapid transformation of manufacturing from digitalization to networking.
It has promoted the continuous integration of the cyber world and the
physical world. At present, the relevant researches on the IoT, sensor
networks and industrial control systems are abundant, but the research of
domestic and international industries on the Industrial Internet itself is
still in its infancy. The development of the Industrial Internet faces the
coexistence of opportunities and challenges. In this paper, we conducted
a detailed survey on the research results of the Industrial Internet. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:


1) A comprehensive survey of Industrial Internet architectures is pre-
sented, including reference architectures proposed by different alli-
ances applied for the IIoT and the Industry 4.0. In addition, an
Industrial Internet architecture supported by wireless technologies is
illustrated, which can better meet the requirements of real-time, low
delay and high reliability.


2) Key technologies applied to the Industrial Internet are comprehen-
sively surveyed. The principles, technical solutions and recent ad-
vances of these technologies are summarized. In particular, emerging
technologies, such as, big data, cloud computing, Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC), are emphasized to provide a more flexible choice
to achieve ultra-dense, large connection, and wide coverage in the
Industrial Internet.


3) A comprehensive survey of various applications and use cases of the
Industrial Internet in different fields is presented, which are sup-
ported by both existing technologies and state-of-the-art communi-
cation technologies. Furthermore, advantages compared with
traditional applications and recent advances are highlighted.


4) The future challenges and research trends related to the Industrial
Internet are identified, especially in wireless networks, such as
sensing, communications, computing and security, which are vital for
further development of Industrial Internet.

2

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, several
architectures of the Industrial Internet proposed by different countries
and academia are presented. In Section 3, a variety of key technologies in
the Industrial Internet are summarized, as well as their advantages and
application scenarios are included. In Section 4, a survey of various ap-
plications supported by emerging wireless technologies is presented. The
current challenges and future trends are shown in Section 5. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section 6. To present the flow of this paper, we
provide the structure of the paper in Fig. 1.


2. Architectures


The Industrial Internet contains various processes and elements in the
field of information technology and industry, which is complex and
diverse. Its emergence and development have been highly valued by
governments around the world and actively practiced by the industry.
However, domestic and overseas researches on the Industrial Internet
itself are still in their infancy, and there is still a lack of uniform standards
for the architectures of the Industrial Internet. In this section, several
Industrial Internet architectures proposed by different countries and
academia are introduced. First, the IIRA for IIoT systems and a reference
architecture model proposed by the Industry 4.0 are briefly surveyed,
and then an architecture supported by wireless communication tech-
nologies is introduced.


2.1. IIRA


IIC proposed the IIRA in order to meet the common technical chal-
lenges of the IIoT, and incorporate new IIoT technologies, concepts as
well as applications [4]. The reference architecture uses a standard-based
framework to describe business, usage, function and implementation
viewpoints. IIC also defined its Industrial Internet Architecture Frame-
work (IIAF) that adopts the approach defined by the ISO/IEC/IEEE ar-
chitecture description standard. IIAF performs as the foundation of the
IIRA, which can be applied to present the interests in IIoT systems.


The constructs of the IIRA and its applications are shown in Fig. 2. The






Fig. 2. IIRA constructs and applications.


Fig. 4. RAMI 4.0.


W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

IIRA has adjusted its models slightly to adapt to the ISO architecture. The
models and their representations in the IIRA show the key ideas of the
reference architecture, and the establishment of the IIRA provides a
common architecture that interconnects smart devices, machines, peo-
ple, processes and data together.


There are four basic viewpoints that identify the relevant stake-
holders of systems and determine the proper framing of concerns,
including business viewpoint (requirement model), usage viewpoint
(use-case model), functional viewpoint (functional model) and imple-
mentation viewpoint (deployment model). Other architectures of the
Industrial Internet can expand their viewpoints based on these four
viewpoints for specific requirements [4]. These viewpoints are arranged
in order as depicted in Fig. 3. The higher-level viewpoint can guide and
impose requirements on the lower level of viewpoints. Moreover, there
are a number of system concerns related to safety and security that need
to be addressed across the viewpoints. According to Ref. [5], there is a set
of system characteristics, including safety, security, resilience, reliability
and privacy, which emphasize how well the system works. Beside the
characteristics about reliability, the IIRA is also provided with interop-
erability, connectivity, data management, advanced data analysis,
intelligent control, dynamic combination and other features.

2.2. Reference architecture model industry 4.0


Germany has officially proposed the Reference Architecture Model
Industry 4.0 (RAMI 4.0) in order to provide a uniform architecture as
reference for different standardization organizations and associations.
The architecture model shown in Fig. 4 describes the Industry 4.0 from

Fig. 3. Relationship among IIRA viewpoints, application scope and system
lifecycle process.


3

three dimensions, including layers, product life cycle& value stream, and
hierarchy levels.


The first dimension refers to the common layered concept used in
information and communication technologies, which is the core function
of CPS. EU Mandate M/490’s reference architecture working group
proposed the Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM) to provide a
structured approach for architecture development [6]. The central ele-
ments are its five interoperability layers of viewpoints, including busi-
ness, function, information, communication, and component. Compared
with SGAM, the RAMI 4.0 uses the asset layer to replace the component
layer, and inserts a new integration layer. These two layers digitally
represent various assets of the real world. The communication layer
implements a standardized communication protocol and controls the
integration layer. The information layer contains relevant data and ap-
plies rules in one or more events that initiate processing in the functional
layer. The functional layer generates rules and decision-making logic,
and it has all necessary functions. The business layer maps the business
models and the resulting overall process.


The second dimension represents the associated value streams and
the life cycle from planning to design, simulation, manufacturing, then to
sales and service. The reference standard for this dimension is IEC 62890
Industrial Process Measurement Control (IPMC) and Automation Systems
and Product Lifecycle Management (ASPLM). This dimension is mainly
embodied in three aspects. First, it is divided into simulation prototype
and physical manufacturing based on IEC 62890 standard. Second,
highlighting various parts of industrial production, such as machines and
factories, must have both virtual and realistic processes. Third, in the
process of value chain construction, industrial production factors are
closely linked by digital systems to achieve end-links in industrial pro-
duction links.


The third dimension describes the functional classification of the In-
dustry 4.0 in different production environments following the IEC 62264
and IEC 61512 standards. Moreover, the product layer is added at the
bottom, and the connected world layer is added at the top of the plant.

2.3. Architecture supported by wireless technology


There are many advances in wireless communication technologies,
especially in the field of wireless sensor networks. Therefore, wireless
technologies have become important parts of researches and innovations
in the Industrial Internet, which support application scenarios and de-
mand analysis for it.


Academic and industrial circles all over the world have paid wide
attention to the application of wireless communication technologies in
the Industrial Internet. Germany plans to provide wide-area network






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

services for the industry by deploying the public 5G network infra-
structure, and implement the latest wireless LAN and near-field tech-
nologies in the Industry 4.0. There are three major components in the
Industry 4.0, including the application layer, network layer and the layer
consisting of physical entities. The IIC also attaches great importance to
the research of network technologies. The study groups have divided the
industrial network into a connection transport layer and a connection
frame layer. Wireless technologies, such as Wi-Fi, ZigBee, 2G/3G/4G,
become important technologies for connecting the transport layer.


In Ref. [7], an Industrial Internet architecture supported by wireless
mobile technologies was proposed, which was based on the demand of
the existing industrial production business for the wireless mobile In-
dustry Internet. Referring to this architecture model and the hierarchical
structure of German Industry 4.0, an architecture oriented to wireless
network is shown in Fig. 5. The architecture consists four layers,
including the application layer, the platform layer, the network inter-
connection layer, and the perception and control layer.


2.3.1. Perception and control layer
This layer is responsible for data acquisition from the physical and


human world, and for deep perception and precise control. It consists of
physical entities, such as machines and intelligent sensing devices con-
trollers, actuators, material, products, etc. The core technologies include
RF technology, emerging sensing technology, wireless network
networking technology, and Fieldbus Control Technology (FCT).


Wireless sensor network is usually the main way for information
acquisition, which can integrate data from sensor nodes over a wireless
network. Then large amounts of data are processed through identifica-
tion and location technologies, embedded intelligence from various ac-
tuators deployed in the field.


Industrial control requires real-time, low delay, high reliability and
security of network communication. As the data sensed in the physical
processes are reflected on the Internet, control strategies need to be taken
by the cyber world and transferred into the physical devices. Industrial
Control Systems (ICSs) have computing and communication capabilities
and they are critical to infrastructure critical systems. And Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) is usually used to control remote
ICSs devices with encoded signals, and these ICSs are typical computer-
based systems that have access to the Internet. From a communication
perspective, monitoring and control require two-way communication:
uplink from sensors to applications, and downlink from applications to
actuators.


2.3.2. Network interconnection layer
This layer takes care of network interconnection and end-to-end data


flow, the network is the foundation to interconnect industrial systems
and promote the transmission and seamless integration of industrial data.
It divides the communication networks into an enterprise external
network and an enterprise internal network according to their ranges of
application. The enterprise external network makes connections between

Fig. 5. Architecture of the Industrial Internet.


4

different enterprises, enterprises and smart products, enterprises and
users, etc. Moreover, the enterprise internal network connects intelligent
machines, products, industrial control systems, people and other entities.


The enterprise internal network consists of networks based on In-
formation Technology (IT) and Operation Technology (OT). The enter-
prise IT network connects the information system and terminals. While
the OT network performs as an industrial communication gradually
infiltrating into the industrial field, which has been used for information
collection, non-real-time control, and internal informationization in the
factory. Therefore, wireless technologies such as Zigbee, Wi-Fi, 2G/3G/
LTE, WIA-PA applied for industrial process automation are already
applied in factories. Furthermore, NarrowBand-IoT (NB-IoT) proposed by
3GPP can be applied to industrial information and control scenarios, such
as low power consumption and large connections, in the factory.


The enterprise external network under the Industrial Internet scene
mainly includes the following four parts: the public Internet based on
IPv6, the Industrial Internet private network based on Soft Defined
Network (SDN) or VPN, ubiquitous wireless access for massive intelligent
products, and support for access and data collection of industrial cloud
platforms. The enterprise external network needs to satisfy requirements
of high transmission rate, ultra-low latency, safety and reliability, flexible
networking, etc. Emerging wireless technologies, such as 5G, SDN [8]
and Network Function Virtualization (NFV), canmeet these requirements
and support the development of the Industrial Internet.


2.3.3. Platform layer
The platform layer executes information fusion, intelligent optimi-


zation and decision-making. The essence of the Industrial Internet plat-
form is to apply emerging technologies on the basis of traditional cloud
platforms to build a more accurate, real-time and efficient data collection
system. This layer is oriented to the digitalization, networking and in-
telligence of manufacturing industries, and builds an intelligent service
system by applying the digital tools, such as big data storage and pro-
cessing, CPS, resource allocation and optimization. Meanwhile, the
platform layer realizes the modeling and software of the industrial
technology, and provides various innovative applications for
manufacturing enterprises.


2.3.4. Application layer
The application layer analyzes and models the data information


stored in the platform layer and forms the required information. This
layer provides specific services that solve the problems of information
processing and human-machine interface. Typical applications include
quality management, energy management, manufacturing execution,
equipment operation optimization, etc. Moreover, in Ref. [9], Applica-
tion Programming Interfaces (APIs) are provided in the application layer
for designing a variety of innovative applications (e.g., device failure
monitoring, device utilization monitoring, and product processing status
monitoring). In addition, developers can accelerate the design of new
applications by customizing data collection, transfer and processing, then
forms new patterns for intelligent production, personalized custom-
ization, network collaboration and service transformation.


3. Key technologies


As a combination of traditional industrial systems and new informa-
tion technology, the Industrial Internet requires the support of a variety
of key technologies, including intelligent sensing and control technology,
network interconnection technology, data processing technology, and
security technology. The key technologies involved in the Industrial
Internet are provided in this section.


3.1. Sensing and control technology


In the Industrial Internet, a large number of sensors for acquiring data
and controllers for executing decisions are deployed in the smart factory.






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

Intelligent sensing and control technologies are important to the inter-
action between the cyber technologies and the physical world.


3.1.1. Sensing
RFID is an important technology in industrial sensing, which uses


radio waves to transmit and automatically identify people or objects
[10]. In general, an RFID system consists of a tag, a reader and a mid-
dleware. The reader transmits radio frequency signals through the an-
tenna, and the tag obtains energy from the radio wave and sends
information to the computer.


Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks (IWSNs) are more adaptable to
harsh industrial environments based on WSNs, which integrates
embedded computing technology, sensor technology, and distributed
information processing technology. It can collaboratively monitor, sense
and collect information of different monitoring objects within the In-
dustrial Internet distributed area in real time. IWSNs offers competitive
advantages compared with traditional wired industrial monitoring and
control system, including self-organization, rapid deployment, flexibility,
lower cost and inherent intelligent-processing capability [11].


3.1.2. Control
The ICSs play an important role in infrastructure-critical systems,


such as power, water distribution, gas pipelines, etc. The ICSs face new
opportunities with the development of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) and the control technology. Reliable methods are
needed to collaboratively design control and automation systems in the
Industrial Internet. In Ref. [12], hybrid approaches for modeling and
implementing distributed controllers in the Industrial Internet were
discussed, verifying that hybrid control is suitable for Industrial Internet
applications and can be extended appropriately.

3.2. Network interconnection technology


The networking architecture of the Industrial Internet is shown in
Fig. 6, which takes smart factory as an application example. The network
inside the smart factory mainly includes an OT network and an IT
network, which connect sensors, controllers and smart devices from the
physical layer. The network outside the smart factory connects the com-
panies, users and other factories. The interconnection of heterogeneous
networks in the Industrial Internet is essential for data transmission as
well as data processing. Communication technologies in the network
interconnection layer can be divided into wired and wireless, depending
on ways of transmission. Fieldbus technology and Industrial Ethernet
technology are commonly used wired technologies in the industrial field.
While wireless technologies, such as Wi-Fi, Zigbee, 2G/3G/4G, have
become important for connecting transport layers. The Industrial Internet
pays more attention to the application of wireless technologies because

Fig. 6. Components of the Industrial Internet. The Industrial Internet were
discussed, verifying that hybrid control is suitable for Industrial Internet ap-
plications and can be extended appropriately.


5

the wireless network has obvious advantages compared with the wired
network. Firstly, the deployment of wireless networks can significantly
reduce the cost of construction and maintenance. In addition, wireless
networks can realize the flexible movement of equipment. Finally, wire-
less technologies can be widely deployed in various industrial environ-
ments, which breaks through the limitations of cable.


3.2.1. Wired communication technology
Fieldbus: Fieldbus connects field devices, field controllers and man-


machine interfaces, which serves as the basis of digital communication
in the factory [13]. Fieldbus is a combination of development automa-
tion, computer technology and smart instruments, and it helps the in-
dustrial automation control technology develop towards the direction of
intelligence and integration. PROFIBUS, WorldFIP, Foundation Fieldbus,
DeviceNet, CAN are representative technologies that belong to Fieldbus
and they provide abundant solutions to deal with different types of data
transmission and applications in industrial networks.


Industrial Ethernet: Industrial Ethernet is the product of extending
Ethernet and Internet technologies applied to industrial measurement.
The Ethernet used by Internet and common computer network is not
suitable to meet the requirements of industrial environments. The tech-
nical subject of Industrial Ethernet is formed through improving the real-
time communication of Ethernet and adding corresponding control
application functions. Industrial Ethernet mainly consists of HSE, Mod-
bus/TCP, PROFINET, Ethernet/IP protocols and provides advantages of
high communication rate, good interoperability, and easy connection to
the Internet, and abundant hardware and software support.


In contrast to Fieldbus, Industrial Ethernet networks allow the
transmission of large amounts of non-time critical data as well as hard
real-time process data communication. In general, specific configuration
tools are used to set up the network, including integrating the necessary
hardware descriptions of the connected devices, setting cycle times and
declaring network masters.


TSN: Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) has the advantages of limited
delay variation and low data loss for time or mission critical traffic,
making it applicable and economical in industrial automation networks.
For example, in an industrial distributed control system, TSN can be used
in machine-to-machine communication and motion control application.
In addition, faced with the strict requirements of reliability and real-time
for industrial applications, a lot of research work have proposed to
deploy fog computing as a solution. Thus, it is critical to choose relative
technologies to connect fog nodes to the industrial smart devices. In
Ref. [14], TSN is advocated as a promising solution that provides related
protocol services for fog computing in the Industrial Internet, and a
configuration agent architecture is proposed to guarantee requirements
of low latency and timely response.


PON: Passive Optical Network (PON) technology has been considered
as a key component for high-speed Internet access. Ericsson and other
major vendors have used the PON technology in the broadband access
portfolios. PONs can support applications, such as human-to-human and
machine-to-machine communication, and have different traffic patterns
as well as quality of service requirements from classical data users [15].


3.2.2. Short-range communication technology
Wi-Fi: Wi-Fi is widely adopted in industry and enterprises, mainly


used for the connection of internal IT networks. The applicability of Wi-Fi
can be extended to industrial hard real-time applications due to its
ubiquitous coverage in industrial environments. In addition, it has the
potential to achieve rapid IT/OT convergence and manufacturing process
flexibility. However, Wi-Fi is usually considered as an energy-consuming
solution, but due to advances in the implementation technology, some
researchers studied the suitability of Wi-Fi as a candidate for low-power
industrial demand, then low-power Wi-Fi can easily integrate with
existing infrastructures, built-in IP network compatibility with familiar
protocols and management tools.


ZigBee: ZigBee is one of the well-known standards for WSNs. As






Table 1
Comparison between WirelessHART and ISA100.11a.


WirelessHART ISA100.11a


Every field instrument must be a router (real
mesh network)


Field instrument may not be a router
(battery life)


Routing at the network layer; 16 bit address Wireless subnet; Routing at DLL
using subnet short address;
Backbone: routing at network layer
using IPv6


Time slot of 10ms, a unique channel hopping
algorithm


Configurable time slot, 3 types of
channel hopping,
5 hop sequences (may cause inter-
operability problems)


Complete stack network in wireless
technology, but no IP based


IPv6 network in the backbone
connecting wireless subnets


Supports unicast and broadcast Supports unicast, broadcast, duocast
and n-cast


Transport layer with
acknowledgement(more reliable)


UDP-based transport layer(faster)


Application layer uses HART7 No define application protocol
Command oriented: command-response
protocol


Object oriented: virtual modeling of
devices


W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

ZigBee supports plant monitoring and control functions with its adaptive
and scalable wireless architecture, it can be used as an advanced
metering infrastructure for smart grids, a monitoring system for intelli-
gent buildings and industrial control management systems, etc. Since Wi-
Fi and ZigBee share the same frequency in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz in-
dustrial science medical band, [16] proposes a solution for the coexis-
tence of the two technologies to resist interference, and to realize optimal
wireless resource allocation and reliable transmission communication in
the Industrial Internet.


3.2.3. Dedicated industrial wireless communication technology
WirelessHART:WirelessHART is widely used in IWSNs with its simple


configuration, flexible installation and easy-to-access instrument data.
Besides, WirelessHART also has powerful and reliable communication
capabilities, its reliability and real-time performance are essential to in-
dustrial production, such as target tracking, industrial control, and
remote monitoring. The generally accepted WirelessHART protocol ar-
chitecture based on the OSI seven-layer protocol is shown in Fig. 7. The
scale of a WirelessHART network is limited to 100 sensor/actuator de-
vices due to limited computing power of the network manager [17]. In
practical Industrial Internet applications, data flow scheduling and
channel resource management are usually required in multiple coexisting
WirelessHART networks to achieve reliability and timeliness.


ISA100.11a: ISA100.11a is released as a wireless standard for process
control and related applications in the industrial automation. It is based
on hybrid channel Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) and Carrier
Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA). ISA100.11a
aims to realize flexibility, high reliability and integrated security in
multiple industrial applications. At present, several works integrate
wireless field devices by jointly using WirelessHART and ISA100.11a
technologies, aiming to support condition monitoring of instruments or
smart devices, and to extend existing plant control networks. The simi-
larities of WirelessHART and ISA100.11a are shown as follows:


Using the IEEE 802.15.4 standard for Low-Rate Wireless Personal
Area Networks (L-R WPAN) to define the radio.
Similar mechanisms for forming the wireless network and trans-
porting data to and from the gateway.
Using 2.4 GHz ISM (Instrumentation, Scientific and Medical) radio
spectrum band and requiring no licensing.
Similar graph routing, source routing, security and centralized
network management functions.


Besides, the typical differences of two standards are listed in Table 1
[18].


WIA-PA/FA: WIA-PA (Wireless Networks for Industrial Automation-
Process Automation) is the standard of industrial wireless

Fig. 7. Architecture of HART communication protocol.


6

communication architecture and specification for process automation
developed by the Chinese Industrial Wireless Alliance (CI-WA). It sup-
ports routers, gateways, field devices and handheld devices. As illus-
trated in Fig. 8, WIA-PA networks adopt 2-layered star-mesh network
topology [19]. The first layer is a mesh network that consists of gateway
devices and routing devices. The second layer is a star structure consti-
tuted by router devices and field devices or handheld devices. Field de-
vices, including wireless sensors, actuators and controllers, can be used to
realize fields monitoring and control in the production field. Workers use
handheld devices to interact with the WIA-PA devices for diagnosis,
configuration, maintenance, etc.


3.2.4. Cellular wireless communication technology
2G/3G/LTE: The rapid development of mobile network technologies


has a profound impact on industry fields, such as network connection for
intelligent products, large-scale long-distance mobile devices or vehicles,
and handheld terminals. [20] also studied the commercial Time
Division-Synchronous Code Division Multiple Access (TD-SCDMA),
which can provide a relatively cost-effective way to build a full-featured
3G core network. With the wider commercial deployment of TD-SCDMA,
a large number of data services and value-added voice services can
provide higher transmission rates and better Quality-of-Service (QoS) for
the Industrial Internet.


GE Digital collaborated with Nokia and Qualcomm Technologies to
successfully demonstrate a private LTE network for the Industrial
Internet with their platforms and technologies meshed together.

Fig. 8. 2-layered star-mesh network topology of WIA- PA.






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

Industrial companies usually operate at remote sites, making the
connection challenging. Private LTE-based networks utilize LTE-based
technologies in shared/unlicensed/dedicated-licensed spectrum, which
helps improve performance and reliability for these industrial
connections.


NB-IoT: The Narrow-Band Internet of Things is a cellular technology
proposed in 3GPP Release 13, which has great potential to meet the huge
demand for machine-type communication in the Industrial Internet. The
NB-IoT is considered one of the most promising Low Power Wide Area
(LPWA) technologies, with advantages of ultra-low power consumption,
wide area coverage, long operation life and massive capacity.


The specific application scenes of the NB-IoT include smart cities,
smart buildings, intelligent environment monitoring, intelligent user
services and smart metering, which can be closely connected with the
Industrial Internet. In the process of industrial production, the factory can
collect the operation and environmental parameters through the NB-IoT
technology and then optimize the production process. For instance, in
Ref. [21], the NB-IoT technology is introduced into industrial network to
reduce transmission delays, and a path selection algorithm is proposed to
improve the schedulability of the industrial system.


5G: Mobile communication technology has developed rapidly over
the past few decades. The major requirements of the 5G system include
1–10 Gbps data rates in real networks, 1 ms round trip latency, enormous
numbers of connected devices, reduction in energy usage by almost 90%.
The Industrial Internet puts a wide range of requirements on the network,
such as performance (latency, throughput), security and reliability. The
introduction of 5G will solve problems such as low latency, and provides
high reliability, high speed and high density deployment in industrial
systems [22].


Three scenarios of 5G have been identified by the ITU Radio
communication sector (ITU-R), including enhanced Mobile BroadBand
(eMBB) scenario, massive Machine Type Communication (mMTC) sce-
nario and Ultra-Reliable and Low Latency Communication (URLLC)
scenario. The typical applications of eMBB include 4 K High Definition
(HD) video, virtual reality, augmented reality, etc. Augmented reality
and virtual reality have potential applications in the field of
manufacturing, such as the design, production and maintenance of the
products. mMTC supports large-scale IoT devices. The current 3G and 4G
transmission networks are not suitable for large-scale machine connec-
tions within the factory. Millimeter wave technology can be adopted in
5G, which will meet the needs of a large number of node communication
in intelligent manufacturing. URLLC scenario refers to applications that
require low latency and high reliability, such as driverless and industrial
automation.


In addition, different aspects of the Industrial Internet have different
QoS requirements for the network. The 5G network slicing technology
can flexibly adjust QoS requirements based on a common network plat-
form. In Ref. [23], a novel 5G-based network slicing framework is pro-
posed, which can support the flexibility expected by the next-generation
manufacturing processes and realize the inter-factory cooperation.


3.3. Data processing technology


In the industrial process, a large amount of data will be generated,
which needs real-time calculation, analysis, storage and other processing
methods. Therefore, data processing technology is a key technology to
improve the core competence and efficiency of the Industrial Internet.
Big data analysis, cloud computing, edge computing technologies used in
the Industrial Internet will be introduced in the following sections.


3.3.1. Big data processing
A large number of industrial data will be generated in the process of


Industrial Internet applications. Industrial big data has the characteristics
of huge data volume, wide data distribution, complex structure, diverse
data processing speed and high confidence requirement for data analysis.
Industrial big data includes data preprocessing technology, data storage

7

and management technology, data analysis and mining technology, big
data visualization technology and other key technologies [24].


Data preprocessing technology: The II generates massive amounts of
data from production equipment, products, information management,
factory exteriors and other processes. Data preprocessing technology can
realize the preliminary cleaning as well as integration of data, and
associate data objects with industrial systems. Thus, it will eliminate
redundancy to avoid meaningless industrial data, reduce storage costs
and improve analysis accuracy.


Data storage and management technology: Distributed storage, cloud
storage and other technologies in the II can be used to achieve the
management of data economically, safely and reliably. MEC, cloudlets
and fog computing services can be used to perform big data processing
and analysis closer to data sources. Current technologies can achieve the
goals of remote data storage, fast access to large data and so on.


Data analysis and mining technology: Data analysis and mining tech-
nology discovers valuable information and generates knowledge from a
large number of noisy and random databases. At present, there are many
technological achievements related to big data analysis. Since industrial
data has a wide range of application objectives, it is necessary to design
feature algorithms in depth with application objectives.


Big data visualization technology: Big data visualization technology is
an important method to help big data acquire a complete view of data
and discover data values [25]. Seamless integration of big data analysis
and visualization enables them to perform better in big data applications
in the Industrial Internet.


3.3.2. Cloud computing
Cloud computing is a new universal Internet-based technology


through which information is stored on servers and delivered to cus-
tomers as a service. It was proposed based on various researches of vir-
tualization, distributed computing, utility computing and software
services. The currently accepted definition of cloud computing is “a
model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to
a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks,
servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provi-
sioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider
interaction”, which was defined by the National Institute Standards and
Technology (NIST) [26]. Based on recommendations from NIST, an ideal
cloud should have five characteristics, namely, on-demand self-service,
broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured
service.


Cloud computing services represent a new business model that pro-
vide accessible and available services to users at any time, these services
enable multiple users to access service resources while ensuring service
reliability. At present, the integration of Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC),
cloud computing and mobile services significantly improves data trans-
mission efficiency and processing power in mobile networks [27]. The
recognized cloud computing service models mainly include Software as a
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Ser-
vice (IaaS) [26]. With the deepening and continuous development of
cloud computing in the field of Industrial Internet, the cloud computing
model has a relatively complete technical system, including
resource-aware technology, cloud service environment management and
construction technology, virtualized cloud service operation technology,
and human-machine interactive technology.


The Cloud Radio Access Network (C-RAN) has been proposed as an
application cloud computing in the radio access network to achieve large-
scale cooperative processing gain [28]. The cloud computing-based radio
access infrastructure will provide on-demand resource processing,
latency-aware storage and high network capacity when needed [29].
Furthermore, Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks (H-CRAN)
were presented to enhance both spectral and energy efficiencies [30].
Applying C-RAN and H-CRAN architecture and corresponding resource
allocation solutions to the Industrial Internet will significantly improve
energy efficiency. The application of cloud computing in the Industrial






Fig. 9. Smart manufacturing systems based on 5C CPS architecture.


W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

Internet involves various fields, such as manufacturing, health care, and
transmission. Cloud computing is gaining greater competitiveness
through greater flexibility, lower cost and optimal resource utilization.


Cloud manufacturing is researched and promoted as an emerging
technology in the Industrial Internet, which is defined as a service-
oriented, customer-centered, demand-oriented manufacturing model. It
can be applied to the automation of Industrial Internet, ICS, andmachine-
to-machine cooperation. Besides, cloud manufacturing can use distrib-
uted knowledge for intelligent service composition and adaptive resource
planning, then realize digital visualization on the cloud [31].


3.3.3. Mobile edge computing
As data is increasingly produced at the edge of the network, cloud


computing technology is not efficient to process the data produced at the
edge of network. MEC was proposed as an emerging prominent
computing paradigm to implement optimization and virtualization
locally. ETSI definedMEC as a new technology that provides an IT service
environment and cloud-computing capabilities at the edge of the
network, within the Radio Access Network (RAN) and in close proximity
to mobile subscribers.


The combination of the Industrial Internet and MEC has attracted
attention. The Industrial Internet requires a high demand for computing
and data processing capabilities, while MEC provides close-range cloud
computing services for smart devices in the Industrial Internet through
edge servers. The edge server is a mobility-enhanced and resource-rich
data center that provides fast access to Internet and users, and it re-
duces the computational burden of devices through proximity-based
services. MEC can save the response time, and reduce overall traffic
load and energy consumption. Thus, the introduction of this technology
can effectively optimize real-time network transmission performance.


Although MEC shows outstanding advantages in the Industrial
Internet, it faces unprecedented challenges, such as energy delay that has
constrained MEC offloading and the resource allocation for various edge
devices. Besides, the MEC system must handle rigorous latency con-
straints while processing massive amounts of data. In the meanwhile,
resources and running applications of individual edge servers for their
tight connections are of great importance. Thus, novel virtualization
technologies are required to enhance flexibility of hardware, isolation
and scalability as a solution.


The existing MEC resource allocation works mainly focus on MEC
offloading, while future research will emphasize more specific MEC at-
tributes, such as communication, compute offloading [32], security and
virtualization. [33] illustrates an example of MEC in the application of
IIoT, in which devices, such as mechanic hands, industrial camera, off-
load computing-intensive tasks to nearby edge servers to save energy and
reduce processing delays. In the Industrial Internet application scenario,
MEC services can be extended to various types of smart objects from
sensors [34] and actuators to smart vehicles.


4. Applications


Under the dual promotion of information technology and industrial
technology, the Industrial Internet has been continuously applied in
various fields and has begun to change our lives subtly. Driven by
emerging wireless communication technologies, the Industrial Internet
can achieve end-to-end integration in interconnection, improve indus-
trial efficiency and meet the needs of industrial intelligence and digiti-
zation. Considering these advantages, industrial powers attach great
importance to applications of the Industrial Internet. As a result, the In-
dustrial Internet is currently used in several vertical industries: smart
manufacturing, intelligent transportation, medical health, commercial
aviation, and power production.


4.1. Smart manufacturing


Smart manufacturing is a key application of the Industrial Internet.

8

The rapid development of information technology has promoted the
transformation and upgrading from traditional manufacturing to intel-
ligent manufacturing. Smart manufacturing can achieve the access of
industrial devices, the scheduling and coordination of resources through
the application of integrated information technology, such as intelligent
sensing, emerging industrial networks and industrial big data platforms
in the Industrial Internet.


The manufacturing powers of industry have proposed different stra-
tegic plans to improve the core competitiveness in the industrial field,
and the CPS plays an important role in the field of intelligent
manufacturing. The United States advocates the Industrial Internet, and
in report [35], it proposes to integrate the CPS, the IoT, automation, big
data and cloud computing together to achieve data synergy and sus-
tainable production. Germany has proposed Industry 4.0, the core of
which is to achieve smart manufacturing through CPS. China also has
proposed China Manufacturing 2025, and intelligent manufacturing,
such as intelligent equipment and smart factory, is leading the change of
manufacturing mode.


A 5C architecture of the CPS for Industry4.0-based manufacturing
systems is proposed in Ref. [36], which provides guidance for the
development of intelligent manufacturing. Therefore, in smart
manufacturing, it will transform traditional factory management to a
self-aware, self-predicting and self-configuring factory with CPS tech-
nologies. The framework shown in Fig. 9 illustrates that the deployment
of smart manufacturing systems follow a bottom-up approach in terms of
the 5C architecture of the CPS, and the information gathered from
various machines provides the plant with self-configuration and
self-maintenance capabilities. Factories can achieve better product
quality and system reliability by implementing the CPS through smarter
and more flexible manufacturing equipment. [37] provides four repre-
sentative examples of the CPS in smart manufacturing, including service
oriented architecture, cloud manufacturing, adaptive manufacturing
systems and model-driven manufacturing systems.


A smart factory is an intelligent manufacturing solution that provides
flexible and adaptive production processes to solve problems in pro-
duction facilities. This solution can be related to automation and
considered as a combination of software, hardware and mechanical. The
deployment of smart factories can effectively lead to manufacturing
optimization, thereby reducing unnecessary labor and resource waste. At
present, a smart factory of Industry 4.0 can be realized by widely
applying existing technologies while actively coping with technical
challenges. Some studies combine industrial wireless networks, cloud,
fixed or mobile terminals with intelligent artifacts (such as machines,
products and conveyors) to propose a smart factory framework. The
reference architecture of smart factory generally consists of smart de-
vices, smart machines, smart engineering, smart logistics, smart grid,






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

smart suppliers, etc.
Emerging information technologies and wireless communication


technologies are driving multiple processes of smart manufacturing
transformation, including automated and programmable product line,
process automation, supply-chain optimization, remote human assis-
tance, remote control of equipment, etc.


The Industrial Internet is a key comprehensive information infra-
structure supporting intelligent manufacturing. Based on real-time
network transmission and efficient data analysis, the Industrial Internet
supports the intelligence of individual machines to production lines,
workshops, factories and even industrial systems under the premise of
security and credibility.


4.2. Intelligent transportation


Researches on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) were intro-
duced more than twenty years ago and the ITS has been continuously
improved and applied with the development of technology. Then with
the rise of the IoT, the ITS has been gradually developed to improve
transportation efficiency, reduce traffic load and ensure traffic safety.
[38] integrates IoT technology and ITS technology, and discusses the
setting of a new generation of ITS. With the application of the Internet,
wireless communication networks and sensor technologies, ITS has great
potential for development in the next few years.


Technologies of the Industrial Internet such as CPS, MEC and fog
computing applied in the field of transportation, have received extensive
attention. The ITS based on CPS can process real-time processing and
transmission of signals, analyze and predict traffic behaviors and con-
ditions through various intelligent sensing devices, then the ITS will
achieve autonomous coordination between people and vehicles, vehicles
and vehicles, vehicles and equipment. By integrating CPS into in-
frastructures, vehicles and roads, the ITS can achieve driver assistance,
avoid collisions, improve travel time, reduce congestion and provide
advanced energy-saving control.


Several architectures of Transportation Cyber Physical Systems (T-
CPS) are proposed, a framework of which is shown in Fig. 10. The T-CPS
aims to solve the traffic problem by using the CPS method based on the
integration of 3C (computing, communication, and control) technologies
[39]. Then, it can achieve information exchange, system coordination
and optimization decisions in the transportation system. The rapid
development of mobile Internet provides new technical support and
development opportunities for intelligent transportation.


In addition, the wireless sensing and the monitors can monitor the
vehicle condition, driving environment and external conditions. Vehicle
Communication System (VCS) is one of the network platforms of the ITS,
which supports message exchanges between vehicles and between ve-
hicles and infrastructure. However, security is one of the main problems

Fig. 10. Transportation cyber physical system.


9

in the VCS, thus the Industrial Internet can provide technologies and
methods to improve transportation safety. [40] proposed a framework
based on the concept of blockchain to provide secure management in the
ITS.

4.3. Medical health


Smart health uses the advanced technologies of Industrial Internet to
create interaction between patients and medical staff, medical in-
stitutions and medical devices by creating a health record regional
medical information platform. The intelligent management of the In-
dustrial Internet supports digital collection, processing, transmission and
control in hospitals, and promotes the development of medical service
systems in the direction of intelligence and modernization.


Some relevant use cases in the medical health where the Industrial
Internet could play a role are discussed below.


4.3.1. Health and wellness monitoring
Healthcare monitoring involves the use of various types of sensors


and wearable devices to track health-relevant indicators. At present, such
devices use short-range communication technologies, then applications
(e.g., smartphones) use the data detected by these devices to help in-
dividuals monitor and manage health or disease (e.g., blood glucose level
management). There has been a wide range of emerging applications
based on the cloud, the IoT or other wireless communication networks
currently used in health management and monitoring. From these
studies, it can be seen that healthcare monitoring is one of the most
revolutionary potential applications. The Industrial Internet based on
cloud computing and big data will play an important role in health
monitoring applications. Healthcare Industrial IoT (HealthIIoT) has sig-
nificant potential in these applications. A conceptual illustration and
scenario for HealthIIoT ecosystem is shown in Fig. 11. HealthIIoT
seamlessly collects data from patients by using a large number of inter-
connected machines, wearable devices (devices and sensors) and cloud
computing technologies [41].


Modern wearable devices, such as Fitbit health monitors, Pebble
smart watches and Google glasses, have inspired new ways to promote
self-management and self-monitoring in the Industrial Internet.


4.3.2. Remote healthcare
When the health monitoring, treatment or consultation of the patients


need to be carried out outside the traditional medical institution (hospital
or clinic, etc.), doctors and the patients can communicate and complete
the treatment process through telepresence facilities and video confer-
encing. Sensors, smart devices and wireless transmission technologies in
the Industrial Internet can supplement these processes. Some works
established remote healthcare systems based on WSNs. Family and
friends can achieve remote care by inferring the condition of patients at
home through WSNs, and the information can help to detect early
symptoms of the disease and prevent its progression. The remote
healthcare system can be used in a home or hospital to form a telehealth

Fig. 11. HealthIIoT ecosystem.






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

system between the home, the community, and the hospital by wireless
communication between the wireless physiological sensor nodes and the
care base station [42].


4.3.3. Assisted surgery and remote surgery
A specialist can remotely assist another doctor in the operation


through the transmission of remote data and video presentation. For
instance, a doctor could watch a live 3D video feed and provide real-time
guidance so that another doctor from another place can locally perform a
surgery on a patient. The surgeon is allowed to remotely operate the
surgical robot to perform surgery on the patient. Wireless communication
technology is required to enable reliable transmission of video and audio
feeds and data between surgeons and remote surgical robots in real time
[43].


4.4. Commercial aviation


Aviation is a typical high-tech manufacturing enterprise. With a
complete research and development system, aviation itself is a large-scale
collaborative supporting industrial system, which has an inherent de-
mand for digital development and flexible, intelligent production. The
Industrial Internet with digital virtualization can achieve product design,
manufacturing and testing in a cyber space, all of which can be accom-
plished virtually. Problems of design, processing, manufacturing and
testing will be found constantly in this process. Then the virtual model
can be adjusted directly, which is mapped to the production process and
the test process later.


The integration of a cloud-based analysis with industrial machinery is
driving the development of the Industrial Internet, which enables pre-
dictive maintenance of aviation through continuous data collection,
monitoring and advanced analysis applications when aircraft compo-
nents need to be repaired or replaced [44]. Staff can control the
machine-engine through big data analysis and complex algorithms. GE
provides advanced technologies critical to superior aircraft performance
and brings a future for the commercial aircraft.


4.5. Energy


Manufacturing and development sectors consume more energy than
other industries. In the industrial sectors, there are still some gaps in
intelligent operation and maintenance services, life cycle management,
performance monitoring and fault warning of complex equipment, which
lead to low utilization rate, frequent failure and long maintenance cycle
of the equipment. The level of equipment management is generally
difficult to meet the requirements of low energy consumption and green
economic development. Since operating costs will have a significant
impact on major decisions in the production and maintenance processes,
the Industrial Internet connects devices to smart sensors, uses electricity
only when needed, and consumes less energy in dormant mode to realize
energy conservation.


At present, all countries are striving to solve the problem of energy
consumption in manufacturing. There are many possibilities to reduce
energy costs and pollution emissions in manufacturing plants. [45] dis-
cusses issues related to the combination of production systems, process
energy and facility energy to improve manufacturing sustainability.
Factories can adjust their production processes to a desired efficiency
level by measuring the energy usage of each manufacturing process in
real time. Real-time monitoring of production systems and collection of
performance data have a positive impact on improving proactive main-
tenance. Industrial Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are capable of
automatic detection and measurement at anytime and anywhere, which
is a promising solution for power line detection. And it is essential for
realizing the future Industrial Internet ecosystem framework. An
energy-saving Industrial Internet of UAVs (IIoUAVs) architecture is
analyzed in Ref. [46], which takes advantages of multiple benefits while
minimizing energy consumption. [47] has studied on the UAV access

10

selection and BS bandwidth allocation in UAV-assisted IoT communica-
tion networks, which aims to balance available communication resources
and service costs.


Emerging autonomous technologies (such as loT, Industrial Internet)
and new market demands are promoting the manufacturing trans-
formation. Based on the implementation of Industry 4.0, [48] proposes a
smart factory energy management method based on the IoT paradigm,
which integrates energy data into production management. At present,
many industries put green manufacturing and energy efficient produc-
tion processes as their prime concern. Data acquisition in the Industrial
Internet relies heavily on a large number of sensor nodes and smart de-
vices, andWSNs are one of the main sources of energy consumption. [49]
proposes a three-layer framework, which applies a new sleep scheduling
protocol to improve energy efficiency, balance the flow load, and extend
the life of the entire system. In the meanwhile, due to the openness of the
wireless channel, it is necessary to jointly consider reducing the power
consumption of the sensor nodes and improving the security performance
when designing models or protocols.


5. Research challenges and future trends


The Industrial Internet pays close attention to the value brought by
the deep integration of the industrial field and the information field,
which is the key foundation for building modern industrial systems and
realizing intelligent manufacturing. It can fully utilize the potential of
physical equipment and process materials, improve production efficiency
and optimize resource allocation. It is an important way to realize
intelligent, digital and networked manufacturing. The Industrial Internet
involves interdisciplinary fields, and there are differences in the standard
definitions of Industrial Internet between industry and academia. With
the continuous evolution of Industrial Internet, there exist various
research challenges and open issues for future research work in the In-
dustrial Internet. In this section, several research challenges and future
research trends of the Industrial Internet are introduced.


5.1. Technical challenges for IWSNs


IWSNs are provided with self-organizing, rapid deployment, flexi-
bility and inherent intelligent processing capabilities. IWSNs can be
applied to industrial automation and improve system efficiency and
productivity. However, complex Industrial Internet environments put
forward higher technical requirements on IWSNs. The main technical
challenges faced by IWSNs are discussed as follows.


5.1.1. Harsh environments and interference avoidance
Harsh industrial environments (such as corrosive environment, high


humidity, vibration, dust, RF interference, etc.) are likely to lead to
failure of industrial sensor nodes, thus affecting the connection and data
transmission of the Industrial Internet. At the same time, there are many
different wireless communication technologies in the Industrial Internet.
Efficient solutions need to be proposed to avoid interference. Innovative
techniques such as radio resource management with complex algorithms
can help IWSNs avoid interference [50].


5.1.2. QoS requirements
Various applications of the IWSN need to meet different QoS re-


quirements and specifications. First, wireless links exhibit widely varying
characteristics in time and space, and their capacity is constantly
changing due to environmental changes and interference, thus failing to
meet QoS requirements. In addition, the IWSN also has different QoS
requirements for transmission delay, system reliability and network
throughput. The data collected by the sensor is usually time-sensitive, so
it is necessary to ensure end-to-end data delivery in real time. [51]
proposed some error control techniques to decrease the number of
retransmissions, but innovative techniques that save energy with lower
complexity need to be put forward as improvements.






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

5.1.3. Resource constraints
Sensor nodes have limited battery energy supply, memory storage


and computational processing due to their physical conditions. There-
fore, the design and implementation of the IWSN are subject to several
constraints. Due to the refresh rate required in process automation, it is
difficult to save a lot of energy by minimizing the duty cycle of wireless
field devices. The maintenance period of wireless devices is shorter than
that of wired devices, and the regular maintenance of massive nodes
causes great cost [52].


5.1.4. Security
The IWSN may encounter many new security attacks and intrusions,


including eavesdropping transmission, modification, interruption and
malicious modification of sensor data because of its own characteristics.
How to integrate security mechanism into the whole automation system
in an effective way is a key issue. More detailed challenges about
communication safety and security in the II are discussed in the following
section.


5.2. New challenges of ICT


The Industrial Internet integrates Internet-based ICT into a complete
industrial chain to make industrial production process more efficient and
adaptable. Various intelligent ICT technologies, such as the Internet,
cloud computing, embedded hardware and software can realize person-
alized products and services, adaptability, flexible processes of produc-
tion chain and supply chain.


At present, a large number of researches on the Industrial Internet are
not mature enough to be applied to actual industries, and the develop-
ment process is relatively slow. There are many reasons involved. From
the perspective of the ICT technology, the Industrial Internet is based on
the development of the ICT environment and has strict requirements of
high security, ultra-reliable, low-latency, and large connections, there-
fore the ICT technology needs to adopt adaptive optimization.


Due to various data transmission requirements of the Industrial
Internet, the rapid increase in data rate and processing power of the ICT
systems require many researches to improve the energy efficiency, and
thus new challenges have arisen. The application of ICT in the Industrial
Internet involves many technologies such as the IoT, industrial automa-
tion, connectivity and ubiquitous information, network security, intelli-
gent robotics, product lifecycle management, semantic technology and
industrial big data. [53] analyzes many challenges and trends related to
the visual computing technology mentioned in the vision of Industry 4.0.


5.3. Security and privacy challenges


Under the trends of the open, interconnected and intelligent devel-
opment in the industrial field, the Industrial Internet is facing severe
security challenges. The integration and innovation of the Internet and
industry continuously promote to connect a large number of industrial
equipment and infrastructures to the public internet. If the network is
attacked unfortunately, it will cause huge losses and even endanger
public life. The openness of the control environment makes it possible for
the threat of the external Internet to penetrate into the factory control
environment. The intellectualization of equipment also makes the de-
vices and products directly exposed to network attacks, then viruses and
hackers have chances to attack the enterprise network. With the devel-
opment of information technology, the protection of data and privacy is
facing unprecedented challenges. Exhibition, network IP, wireless and
flexible information networking will also bring greater security risks to
the factory network. In the future, the Industrial Internet will mainly face
the following security problems.


5.3.1. Equipment security issues
In future intelligent manufacturing, equipment and products will


integrate with general embedded operating system and application

11

software, which will directly lead to a large number of devices exposed to
network attacks and virus threats. The main security challenges faced by
intelligent devices and products include chip security, application soft-
ware/hardware security, embedded operating system and functional
security.


5.3.2. Network security issues
The existing TCP/IP protocol attack methods are mature enough to


attack the factory network directly. Smart grids are promising applica-
tions in the Industrial Internet, but increased interconnection and inte-
gration will also introduce network vulnerabilities into the grid. In the
meanwhile, communication systems are vulnerable to attacks such as
illegal intrusion, information leakage and denial of service.


5.3.3. Control security issues
Due to the high requirement of real-time and reliability of industrial


control, additional information security functions, such as authentica-
tion, authorization and encryption, will be reduced, resulting in insuffi-
cient information security protection capability. The integration of the IT
and the OT makes it possible for network attacks to penetrate from the IT
layer to the OT layer and from outside to inside of the factory.


5.3.4. Application security issues
Complex industrial applications put forward requirements to improve


network security isolation and security assurance capabilities. Applica-
tion software and industrial cloud platforms will face traditional security
challenges such as Trojan horse virus and vulnerabilities.


5.3.5. Data security issues
Industrial big data is numerous, complex, and openly shared inside


and outside the factory. As a result, there will be many security threats
such as data loss, leakage and tampering.


5.4. Standardization


Standardization of the Industrial Internet can improve the interop-
erability of different applications or systems. Serious standardization
processes and extensive coordination are required to ensure that devices
and applications from different countries can exchange information with
each other. Different companies and alliances in various countries have
proposed numerous Industrial Internet standards, yet there is not a
recognized uniform Industry Internet standard.


Standardization plays a key role in the Industrial Internet because it
helps resolve inter-operability, compatibility, reliability, security and
efficient operation between heterogeneous solutions. [54] studies the
status of Industrial Internet standardization, and the results show that
standardization in the field of Industrial Internet has just emerged. At
present, all walks of life need to speed up the strategic layout, accelerate
the technical standardization process related to the Industrial Internet,
and complete the standard setting for domestic and international
cooperation.


5.5. Future trends


With the continuous development of emerging science and technol-
ogies such as fog computing, blockchain [55] and a new generation of
artificial intelligence, the technical system of the Industrial Internet is
constantly improved. Though the Industrial Internet faces many chal-
lenges, in the meanwhile, it has broad prospects for development. We
discuss some future research trends of the Industrial Internet as follows.


5.5.1. Integration of fog computing and Industrial Internet
Fog computing extends powerful capabilities of cloud computing to


the edge of the network. Cloud-based computing may encounter latency
issues due to limited capacity of the fronthaul, and fog/edge computing
solves real-time applications that are not suitable for the cloud at the






W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

edge of the network and distributed control [56]. In fog computing, edge
access points can directly perform Collaboration Radio Signal Processing
(CRSP) and Cooperative Radio Resource Management (CRRM) locally,
thus the heavy burden of fronthaul and the BBU pool is alleviated, and
the delay is significantly reduced [57]. Meanwhile, Fog computing-based
Radio Access Network (F-RAN) has been proposed as an advanced so-
cially aware mobile network architecture. As a result, F-RAN can achieve
high SE/EE, low latency and excellent reliability for different Industrial
Internet applications such as industrial automation, transportation and
mobile vehicle connectivity [58,59]. In the future, there will be tens of
billions of terminal devices connected to each other. The requirements
for massive data processing, low latency and high reliability for Industrial
Internet applications need the integration and development of fog
computing and Industrial Internet.


5.5.2. Blockchain enhances the security of the Industrial Internet
At present, the blockchain has relatively mature applications in the


fields of finance, health care, etc. Many studies have focused on the se-
curity, privacy and scalability of blockchains [60]. Transforming the
Industrial Internet platform through blockchain technology can avoid
data loss and tampering caused by attacks on a single data center, and
improve data security of the platform. [61] proposes a distributed
peer-to-peer platform based on blockchain technology. The platform
enables peers in a decentralized, untrusted peer-to-peer network to
interact with each other without a trusted intermediary by using block-
chain technology. At the same time, the application of blockchain tech-
nology will predict and prevent the failure of manufacturing plant
equipment, which ensures the reliability of the equipment. With the
technological innovations in the Industrial Internet field, blockchains can
integrate with the Industrial Internet platforms and cloud computing
more quickly to improve the security and intelligence of the Industrial
Internet.


5.5.3. Development of new generation artificial intelligence
The information environment developed by artificial intelligence has


undergone profound changes with the popularity of the Internet. The
development of big data, and the interconnection and integration of
physical space and cyber space have led to a new evolutionary phase: AI
2.0. In the future, the Industrial Internet needs to be developed toward
the direction of intelligence. Driven by the recent development of arti-
ficial intelligence, [62] proposed a joint model selection and resource
management method based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to
support IoT services. The deep integration of the new generation of
artificial intelligence technology and the Industrial Internet is conducive
to the rapid development of the application technology in the
manufacturing industry chain, especially intelligent production and
intelligent services.


6. Conclusion


The Industrial Internet is a deep integration of advanced computing,
analysis, and sensing technologies into global industrial systems. This
paper surveys the recent research works in the Industrial Internet,
including the system architecture, key techniques, and open issues. To
further understand the intricacies of the Industrial Internet, three refer-
ence architectures of the Industrial Internet in different scenarios have
been presented. As the stringent requirements of the Industrial Internet
for transmission rate, low delay and high reliability require emerging
technical support such as cloud computing, MEC, fog computing and
intelligent artificial. Key technologies especially wireless communication
technologies and emerging technologies are emphasized as well. More-
over, emerging applications of Industrial Internet used in different fields
are presented. Nevertheless, there are still a large number of challenges
and open issues that need to be solved.

12

Conflict of interest


The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this
work.


We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative in-
terest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work
submitted。


Authors: Wei Qin, Siqi Chen, Mugen Peng.


Acknowledgement


This paper was supported in part by the State Major Science and
Technology Special Projects (Grant 2018ZX03001023-005), the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61831002,
61728101, and 61671074, and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under Grant No. JQ18016.


Appendix A. Supplementary data


Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://do
i.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001.


References


[1] J. Immelt, How the Industrial Internet Is Transforming Business Today [Online].
Available: http://www.geautomation.com/industrial-internet.


[2] R. Baheti, H. Gill, Cyber Physical Systems, the Impact of Control Technology, 2011,
pp. 161–166.


[3] E. Geisberger, M. Broy, Living in a Networked World: Integrated Research Agenda
Cyber-Physical Systems (Agenda CPS), Utz Verlag GmbH, 2015.


[4] S.-W. Lin, et al., in: The Industrial Internet of Things, Volume G1: Reference
Architecture, Jan. 2017 [online]. Available: https://www.iiconsortium.org/IIC PUB
G1 V1.80 2017-01-31.pdf.


[5] Industrial Internet Consortium: industrial internet security framework technical
document, version 1.0, 2016 [online]. Available: http://www.iiconsortium
.org/IISF.


[6] J. Trefke, S. Rohjans, M. Uslar, S. Lehnhoff, L. Nordstrom, A. Saleem, Smart grid
architecture model use case management in a large european smart grid project, in:
Proceedings Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (lSGT EUROPE), 2013,
pp. 1–5.


[7] H. Xia, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, et al., Wireless mobile support industrial internet
research, Microprocessors (2) (2017).


[8] M. Peng, T. Huang, Y.R. Yu, J. Pan, IEEE access special section editorial: recent
advances in software defined networking for 5G networks, IEEE Access 3 (2015)
3076–3078.


[9] J. Wan, et al., Software-defined industrial internet of things in the context of
industry 4.0, IEEE Sens. J. 16 (20) (2016) 7373–7380.


[10] Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Understanding the determinants of RFID adoption in the
manufacturing industry, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 77 (5) (2010) 803–815.


[11] V.C. Gungor, G. Hancke, Industrial wireless sensor networks: challenges design
principles and technical approaches, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 56 (10) (Oct. 2009)
4258–4265.


[12] M. Moness, A.M. Moustafa, A.H. Muhammad, A.A. Younis, Hybrid controller for a
software-defined architecture of industrial internet lab-scale process, in: 12th
International Conference on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES), 2017,
pp. 266–271, 2017.


[13] J.- Thomesse, Fieldbus technology in industrial automation, Proc. IEEE 93 (6) (June
2005) 1073–1101.


[14] P. Pop, M.L. Raagaard, M. Gutierrez, W. Steiner, Enabling fog computing for
industrial automation through time-sensitive networking (TSN), IEEE Commun.
Stand. Mag. 2 (2) (June 2018) 55–61.


[15] M.D. Andrade, M. Maier, M.P. McGarry, M. Reisslein, Passive optical network
(PON) supported networking, Opt. Switch. Netw. 14 (2014) 1–10.


[16] J. Kim, W. Jeon, K. Park, J.P. Choi, Coexistence of full- duplex-based IEEE 802.15.4
and IEEE 802.11, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 14 (Dec. 2018), 5389 C 5399.


[17] X. Jin, F. Kong, L. Kong, W. Liu, P. Zeng, Reliability and temporality optimization
for multiple coexisting WirelessHART networks in industrial environments, IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron. 64 (8) (Aug. 2017) 6591–6602.


[18] J.D. Adriano, E. C. d. Rosario, R. Joel J. P. C, Wireless Sensor Networks in Industry
4.0: WirelessHART and ISA100.11a, 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on
Industry Applications (INDUSCON)., 2018, pp. 924–929.


[19] H. Wang, L. Shao, S. Xia, P. Wang, M. Li, An efficient channel utilization scheme for
WIA-PA industrial wireless networks based on link skipping, in: IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data, SmartData)., 2016, pp. 406–409, 2016.


[20] M. Peng, W. Wang, H.-H. Chen, TD-SCDMA evolution, IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 5
(2) (Jun. 2010) 28–41.



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.07.001

http://www.geautomation.com/industrial-internet

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref3

https://www.iiconsortium.org/IIC%20PUB%20G1%20V1.80%202017-01-31.pdf

https://www.iiconsortium.org/IIC%20PUB%20G1%20V1.80%202017-01-31.pdf

http://www.iiconsortium.org/IISF

http://www.iiconsortium.org/IISF

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref20




W. Qin et al. Digital Communications and Networks 6 (2020) 1–13

[21] C. Xia, X. Jin, L. Kong, P. Zeng, D. Guan, Scheduling for Heterogeneous Industrial
Networks Based on NB-IoT Technology, IECON 2017 - 43rd Annual Conference of the,
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2017, pp. 3518–3523.


[22] Z. Zhou, M. Peng, Z. Zhao, W. Wang, R.S. Blum, Wireless- powered cooperative
communications: power-splitting relaying with energy accumulation, IEEE J. Sel.
Area. Commun. 34 (4) (Apr. 2016) 969–982.


[23] T. Taleb, I. Afolabi, M. Bagaa, Orchestrating 5G Network Slices to Support Industrial
Internet and to Shape Next-Generation Smart Factories, IEEE Network., 2019,
pp. 1–9.


[24] M. Chen, S. Mao, Y. Liu, Big data: a survey, Mob. Netw. Appl. 19 (2) (2014)
171–209.


[25] L. Wang, G. Wang, C.A. Alexander, Big data and visualization: methods challenges
and technology progress, Digit. Technol. 1 (1) (2015) 33–38.


[26] P. Mell, T. Grance, The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing, US Nat’l Inst. of
Science and Technology, 2011 [online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800- 145/SP800-145.pdf.


[27] Y. Li, J. Liu, B. Cao, C. Wang, Joint optimization of radio and virtual machine
resources with uncertain user demands in mobile cloud computing, IEEE Trans.
Multimed. 20 (9) (Sep. 2018) 2427–2438.


[28] M. Peng, Y. Sun, X. Li, Z. Mao, C. Wang, Recent advances in cloud radio access
networks: system architectures key techniques and open issues, Commun. Surv.
Tutorials, IEEE 18 (3) (2016) 2282–2308.


[29] M. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, System architecture and key technologies for 5G
heterogeneous cloud radio access networks, IEEE Network., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 6-14,
Mar./Apr. 2015.


[30] M. Peng, K. Zhang, J. Jiang, J. Wang, W. Wang, Energy- efficient resource
assignment and power allocation in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks,
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 64 (11) (Nov. 2015) 5275–5287.


[31] Y.Q. Lu, X. Xu, A semantic web-based framework for service composition in a cloud
manufacturing environment, J. Manuf. Syst. 42 (2017) 69–81.


[32] B. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Feng, W. Cao, Intelligent offloading in multi-access edge
computing: a state-of-the-art review and framework, IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (3)
(March 2019) 56–62.


[33] W. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Yue, H. Zhang, Double auction-based resource allocation for
mobile edge computing in industrial internet of things, IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.
14 (10) (Oct. 2018) 4692–4701.


[34] B. Cao, S. Xia, J. Han, Y. Li, A distributed game method- ology for crowdsensing in
uncertain wireless scenario, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. (2019), https://doi.org/
10.1109/TMC.2019.2892953, 1-1.


[35] Implementing 21st Century Smart Manufacturing, 2011 [online]. Available: http://
www.smart-processmanufacturing.ucla.edu.


[36] J. Lee, B. Bagheri, H.-A. Kao, A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-
based manufacturing systems, Manuf. Lett. 3 (Jan. 2015) 18–23.


[37] L. Wang, M. Torngren, M. Onori, Current status and advancement of cyber-physical
systems in manufacturing, J. Manuf. Syst. 37 (Oct. 2015) 517–527.


[38] L. Chunli, Intelligent transportation based on the internet of things, Proc. Int. Conf.
Consum. Electron. Commun. Netw. (Apr. 2012) 360–362.


[39] D. Sun, Y. Li, W. Liu, M. Zhao, X. Liao, Research summary on transportation cyber
physical systems and the challenging technologies, China J. Highw. Transp. 26 (1)
(Jan. 2013) 0144–0155.


[40] A. Lei, et al., Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous
intelligent transportation systems, IEEE Internet Things J.v 4 (6) (Dec. 2017)
1832–1843.


[41] M.S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, Cloud-assisted industrial internet of things (IIoT)-
enabled framework for health monitoring, Comput. Network. 101 (2016) 192–202.

13

[42] Z. Zhao, L. Cui, A remote health care system based on wireless sensor networks, Inf.
Control 35 (No.2) (2006) (In Chinese).


[43] J. Marescaux, J. Leroy, F. Rubino, et al., Transcontinental Robot- Assisted Remote
Telesurgery: Feasibility and Potential Applications, Ann. Surg, 2002, pp. 487–492.


[44] J. Daily, J. Peterson, Predictive maintenance. how big data analysis can improve
maintenance, in: K. Richter, J. Walther (Eds.), Supply Chain Integration Challenges
in Commercial Aerospace, Springer International, 2017, pp. 267–278.


[45] J. Berglund, J. Michaloski, S. Leong, G. Shao, F. Riddick, J. Arinez, S. Biller, Energy
Efficiency Analysis for a Casting Production System, Winter Simulation Conference
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1060–1071.


[46] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, Energy-efficient UAV communication with trajectory
optimization, IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 16 (6) (Jun. 2017) 3747–3760.


[47] S. Yan, M. Peng, X. Cao, A game theory approach for joint access selection and
resource allocation in UAV assisted IoT communication networks, IEEE Internet
Things J. 6 (2) (April. 2019) 1663–1674.


[48] F. Shrouf, J. Ordieres, G. Miragliotta, Smart factories in industry 4.0: a review of the
concept and of energy management approached in production based on the internet
of things paradigm, 2014, in: IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Engineering and Engineering Management, 2014, pp. 697–701.


[49] K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Guo, J. Wu, Green industrial internet of things
architecture: an energy-efficient perspective, IEEE Commun. Mag. 54 (12) (Dec.
2016) 48–54.


[50] D. Yang, M. Gidlund, Y. Xu, Coexistence of ieee 802.15.4 based networks: a survey,
36th Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON’10)., pp.
2107-2113, Nov. 2010.


[51] L. Li, R.G. Maunder, B.M. Al-Hashimi, L. Hanzo, An energy-efficient error correction
scheme for ieee 802.15.4 wireless sensor networks, Trans. Circuits Syst. Part II 57
(3) (March 2010) 233–237.


[52] J. Akerbcrg, M.M. Gidlund, M. Bjorkman, Future research challenges in wireless
sensor and actuator networks targeting industrial automation, in: 2011 9th IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Informatics, 2011, pp. 410–415.


[53] J. Posada, et al., Visual computing as a key enabling technology for industrie 4.0
and industrial internet, IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 35 (2) (2015) 26–40.


[54] T. Muhonen, Standardization of Industrial Internet and IoT: Perspective on
Condition-Based Maintenance, M.S. thesis, Dept. Ind. Eng. Manag., Univ. at Oulu,
Oulu, Finland, 2015.


[55] B. Cao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, et al., When Internet of Things Meets Blockchain: Challenges
in Distributed Consensus, IEEE Network, 2019, 1-1.


[56] H.P. Breivold, K. Sandstrom, Internet of things for industrial automation: challenges
and technical solutions, in: IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Data
Intensive Systems, 2015, pp. 532–539. Dec. 2015.


[57] M. Peng, S. Yan, K. Zhang, C. Wang, Fog-computing-based radio access networks:
issues and challenges, IEEE Network 30 (4) (Jul.-Aug. 2016) 46–53.


[58] M. Peng, K. Zhang, Recent advances in fog radio access networks: performance
analysis and radio resource allocation, IEEE Access 4 (Sep. 2016) 5003–5009.


[59] S. Yan, M. Peng, M.A. Abana, W. Wang, An evolutionary game for user access mode
selection in fog radio access networks, IEEE Access 5 (2017) 2200–2210.


[60] Y. Li, B. Cao, et al., Direct acyclic graph based blockchain for Internet of things:
performance and security analysis [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1
905.10925, 2019.


[61] A. Bahga, V.K.Madisetti, Blockchain platform for industrial internet of things, J. Softw.
Eng. Appl, 533-546 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.4236/jsea.2016.910036.


[62] Y. Sun, M. Peng, S. Mao, Deep reinforcement learning based mode selection and
resource management for green fog radio access networks, IEEE Internet Things J. 6
(2) (April. 2019) 1960–1971.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref25

http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-%20145/SP800-145.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref33

https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2019.2892953

https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2019.2892953

http://www.smart-processmanufacturing.ucla.edu

http://www.smart-processmanufacturing.ucla.edu

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref59

https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10925

https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10925

https://doi.org/10.4236/jsea.2016.910036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2352-8648(19)30116-6/sref62


