









Special Section: Economics of Blockchain Technology


Adoption of Blockchain Technology in the
Australian Grains Trade: An Assessment of


Potential Economic Effects*


Don Gunasekera1 and Ernesto Valenzuela2


Recent analysis of Blockchain use has highlighted considerable potential pro-
ductivity gains arising from lower transaction costs between buyers and sell-
ers of goods. This has been shown by recent examples of Blockchain use in
the Australian grains sector. In this paper, we have further developed and
quantified this concept of productivity gain by undertaking several illustra-
tive scenarios using a general equilibrium model of the global economy. Our
analysis indicates that an assumed modest growth (five per cent) in produc-
tivity due to Blockchain use in the grains sector could raise output by eight
per cent over the medium term. If this is accompanied by Blockchain use in
the Australian finance sector, grains output could reach ten per cent. This
reflects the effect of reduction in transaction costs due to the use of Block-
chain technology as a “distributed ledger technology” in grain trading. Fur-
ther, it is anticipated that the wider effects of Blockchain-driven productivity
enhancement of the Australian finance sector could contribute to approxi-
mately 2.5 per cent increase in GDP in the medium term, relative to what
would otherwise be.


Keywords: Australia, Blockchain, general equilibrium modelling, grains
trade, productivity.


1. Introduction
An increasing attention is being given to the potential use of Blockchain technology to generate pro-
ductivity gains in an extensive number of sectors, ranging from finance, energy, agriculture, health,
land and property management and development aid, to government services and beyond (Pisa &
Juden, 2017; Kim & Laskowski, 2017; Hanson et al., 2017; Staples et al., 2017; International Finance
Corporation, 2017a).


*An earlier version of this research was presented at the 2018 Australian Conference of Economists, Canberra,
10-13 July. The authors gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments from an anonymous reviewer and the
Editor of this Journal. Both authors have contributed to this paper, and they have no conflict of interest.


1Deakin University, Geelong campus Geelong, VIC, Australia.
2Federation University Australia, Berwick campus Berwick, VIC, Australia.
JEL classifications: C68, Q17
Correspondence: Don Gunasekera, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Hwy, Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia. Email:


don.gunasekera@deakin.edu.au
Accepted date: December 18, 2019


ECONOMIC PAPERS, VOL. 39, NO. 2, JUNE 2020, 152–161


152


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia
doi: 10.1111/1759-3441.12274



mailto:




















According to Iansiti and Lakhani (2017), Blockchain technology is underpinned by five basic ele-
ments: a distributed database; peer-to-peer transactions; transparency; irreversibility of data records;
and computational logic (see Box 1).
It has been argued that Blockchain technology has the potential to become a general-purpose tech-


nology (GPT; Catalini & Gans, 2016; International Finance Corporation, 2017a). Commonly known
historical examples of GPTs include the steam engine, the electric motor, semiconductors and the
Internet. In general, these GPTs play the role of enabling technologies in that they facilitate the devel-
opment of new opportunities and can find application in many sectors and industries. They have the
inherent potential to generate significant technical improvements over time which can spawn
ground-breaking innovations. With such characteristics, GPTs generate economic activity and, in
time, lead to generalised productivity gains.
Given this background of the potential impacts of the use of Blockchain technology, our focus here


is on its potential use in the Australian grains industry. We see that there are several reasons for the
need for this initial speculation. First, amidst substantially growing investment in approaches to
aspects of “digital agriculture” and increasing interest in Blockchain, there have been several recent
pilot use case examples of the adoption of Blockchain in the Australian grains industry. For example,
in 2016, an Australian wheat grower delivered a consignment of wheat to an exporter in Dubbo,
NSW, using Blockchain technology and received payment promptly. This was regarded as a global
first between a grower and buyer within the agricultural industry (Australian Financial Review,
2016). Similarly, in 2017, a delivery of oats by an Australian grain grower cooperative (CBH) to a
buyer took place using Blockchain technology (AgriDigital & CBH Group, 2017). In both cases, “dis-
tributed ledger technology,” which underpins Blockchain technology, has been used for the transac-
tion. This meant that no intermediaries were involved, which in turn reduced the transaction costs
for the trading parties.


Box: Key elements of a Blockchain system


A distributed database in Blockchain technology is similar to a distributed network or a distributed ledger.


All the participants (or users) within a Blockchain have access to the entire distributed database, which


means that no single participant controls the information or data on a Blockchain. Thus, without need


for an intermediary, every participant can verify the records of its transaction partners directly.


Within a Blockchain, peer-to-peer transactions take place directly between peers via the nodes (i.e., the


peers’ or participants’ computers on a Blockchain network). Each user/participant both stores and for-


wards information to all other nodes within a Blockchain, instead of being routed through a central


node. This data sharing represents the “distributed nature” of the data or information base within a


Blockchain.


It is this distributed nature of the database or the ledger that generates its transparency. In practice,


every transaction and its associated value are visible to all the users or participants with access to the


Blockchain system. Furthermore, in such a system, the submitted records cannot be changed once a


transaction is entered in the database and the records are updated. This security arises because every


legitimately entered piece of data is intimately linked to every other transaction record that has been


previously entered. The term “chain” arises from this process. Overall, the records on the database are


permanent, irreversible, chronologically ordered and only available to legitimate participants on the net-


work. This is ensured through the use of various computational algorithms and approaches.


The cryptographic and digital nature of the distributed database means Blockchain transactions can


be linked to computational logic, and therefore, in essence, they can be programmed. Hence, users or par-


ticipants (who are termed nodes) can set up algorithms and rules that automatically trigger transactions


between the chain’s nodes (Iansiti & Lakhani, 2017).


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


2020 BLOCKCHAIN ADOPTION IN AUSTRALIAN GRAINS 153














Second, there have been several recent examples of the use of Blockchain technology in agricul-
ture. For example, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Wells Fargo and Brighann Cotton have
recently undertaken the first global trade transaction between two independent banks combining the
Blockchain technology, smart contracts and Internet of Things (IoT). The transaction involved a ship-
ment of cotton from Texas, United States to Qingdao, China, using the efficiencies of a distributed
ledger – Skuchain’s Brackets system – for all parties (see Pearce, 2018; Weston, 2018). Additionally,
the Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) for Food Agility, Queensland University of Technology and
Beef Ledger Ltd are currently undertaking a project using Blockchain and IoT to create an unbreak-
able, immutable record, tracking beef from paddock to plate, credentialing the provenance of Aus-
tralian beef. This information will drive apps for consumers and suppliers, giving them confidence
that their meat is 100 per cent Australian (see https://www.foodagility.com/projects/beefledger-
export-smart-contracts).
Recently, Zhao et al. (2019) have used a systematic literature network analysis to review the state-


of-the-art Blockchain technology including its recent advances and main applications in agri-food
value chain. Their findings indicate that Blockchain technology together with advanced information
and communication technology and Internet of Things has been adopted for the improvement of
agri-food value chain management in four main areas: traceability, information security, manufac-
turing and sustainable water management.
According to Kamilaris et al., (2019), Blockchain technology is already being adopted by many pro-


jects, aiming to establish a proven and trusted environment to build a transparent and more sustain-
able food production and distribution, and integrating key stakeholders into the supply chain.
However, there are still many issues that need to be addressed, beyond those at technical level.
A recent review of Blockchain applications in the agri-food sector by Antonucci et al., (2019) indi-


cates the need for greater real-world case studies. According to Sylvester (2019), the key drivers of
the use of Blockchain technology in the agriculture domain include self-executing smart contracts
together with automated payments. The role of smart contracts especially in agricultural insurance
and traceability could be very effective. Agricultural insurance built on Blockchain technology with
key weather incidents and related payouts drafted on a smart contract would facilitate immediate
payout in the case of a drought or flooding in the field.
Third, there is presently limited quantitative analysis of the economic impacts of Blockchain use.


Given the paucity of this evidential background, the purpose of this paper is to undertake an illustra-
tive quantitative analysis of the potential economic impacts of Blockchain technology use, with a par-
ticular focus on the Australian grains industry.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides a broad analytical framework which under-


pins our approach to analysing the economic effects of Blockchain use. The scenario analysis of the
potential economic effects of Blockchain adoption in the Australian grains trade is provided in Sec-
tion 3. Section 4 provides the results of our scenario analysis. The final section provides some discus-
sion and conclusions.


2. Analytical Framework
Two schools of thought have emerged in the literature in relation to analysing the economic effects of
Blockchain. These are (i) the innovation-centred approach and (ii) a governance-centred approach
(Davidson et al., 2016), each of which will be summarised here.


2.1. The Innovation-Centred Approach
According to the innovation-centred approach, Blockchain is an information and computation technol-
ogy (ICT) and can be regarded as a software protocol based on cryptography. It can also be regarded
as a technology for public databases concerned with digital information, and as such, it can lead to
technology-driven efficiency/productivity improvements (Davidson et al., 2016).
This claimed source of the productivity gain can often be traced to an organisational efficiency gain.


Blockchain helps lower production costs by changing the organisational form by which value is cre-
ated, often stripping out layers of activity (e.g., the intermediaries) that are no longer required. In this


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


154 ECONOMIC PAPERS JUNE



https://www.foodagility.com/projects/beefledger-export-smart-contracts

























https://www.foodagility.com/projects/beefledger-export-smart-contracts




respect, Catalini and Gans (2016) have identified two key costs that are affected by the distributed
ledger technology which underpins Blockchain, namely, the cost of verification and the cost of net-
working. These are important components of transaction costs which reflect the cost of intermedia-
tion which buyers and sellers incur when they cannot efficiently verify all the relevant attributes of a
specific transaction by themselves.
A well-functioning market relies on robust identity verification as well as on the ability to verify


the goods and services being exchanged. Here, the key issues include the provenance of the data,
how transactions were changed or transformed through the supply chain, and an understanding of
the credentials of the parties involved, such as their professional licensing and registration status. In
general, within an industry the identity and credentials’ verification of those involved in transactions
relies upon intermediaries such as governments and other entities including banks and financial insti-
tutions. However, in general there is always some degree of information leakage and risk of reuse of
private information outside of the designated transactions, but it is claimed that Blockchain technol-
ogy can reduce this risk by allowing for authentication without disclosure of sensitive information
(Catalini & Gans, 2016). For example, in ecommerce and online investment activities, various pro-
cesses of transactions require verification of ownership, checks and balances using various intermedi-
aries such as financial institutions. Blockchain helps to both assure the security of essential
knowledge transfer, and to lower the cost of these verifications. It hence improves the efficiency of
these transactions (Catalini & Gans, 2016; Suikkanen, 2017) using decentralised solutions without
the use of intermediaries. Davidson et al. (2016) argue that these decentralised solutions to ledgers
can become increasingly cost-efficient compared to centralised solutions, leading to significant effi-
ciency gains.
Davidson et al. (2016) also argue that productivity gains resulting from the use of Blockchain can


be viewed in the form of shifts in the aggregate production function which translates into multifactor
productivity growth. In addition, they point out that a more transformational aspect of Blockchain
approaches is that it gives rise to new organisational and institutional forms of economic governance
which clearly makes Blockchain a general-purpose technology (GPT).
In this paper, we pursue the productivity impact-related aspect of the likely effects of the use of


Blockchain. In particular, we focus on the potential productivity improvements due to the adoption
of Blockchain as a vector for information and communication technology (ICT). In particular, we
focus on the nature of a Blockchain-enabled efficiency improvement in a sector or industry where it
is employed (see Davidson et al., 2016), and this line of investigation is further expanded in Section 3.


2.2. Governance-Centred Approach
The premise of the governance-centred approach to the economics of Blockchain is that the transforma-
tional aspect of this technology can give rise to new organisational and institutional forms of eco-
nomic governance (Davidson et al., 2016). In this context, the understandings drawn from
transaction cost economics (see Williamson, 1973, 1975,1985) may provide useful insights in relation
to this approach (see Davidson et al., 2016). In this respect, according to the transaction cost eco-
nomics, markets and firms are alternative institutions of economic governance (see Williamson,
1975). In other words, these institutions are the sites that actually organise transactions, and of rele-
vance here is that transaction costs in markets originate from information costs, bargaining costs and
enforcement costs of contracts (Suikkanen, 2017).
It has been noted (see Williamson, 1985) that one of the basic insights of transaction cost eco-


nomics is that the transactions that occur in markets can create room for opportunism. According to
Williamson (1985), the existence of organisational form is largely shaped by the need to control
opportunism. Whereas markets are often efficient governance institutions for spot contracts where
there is immediate payment and delivery, in situations where the economic activity requires asset
specificity (coordinated investment through time), frequency (ongoing relation between parties) and
uncertainty (un-contractible dealings), alternative governance institutions are needed to deal with
the hazard of opportunism (Williamson, 1985).


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


2020 BLOCKCHAIN ADOPTION IN AUSTRALIAN GRAINS 155






An important approach, which is available to mitigate opportunism, is to introduce a trusted third
party, like a bank or a real estate agent, who can facilitate and manage the trust between the two rel-
evant agents of the transaction (see Williamson, 1985; North, 1990). Accordingly, firms and interme-
diating centralised entities such as banks have emerged as a mechanism to deal with opportunism
(Suikkanen, 2017). Catalini and Gans (2016) argue that Blockchain technology is “more likely to
change the scope of intermediation” through reduction of transaction costs and by allowing the for-
mulation of new types of marketplaces.
In this respect, Gifford and Cheng (2016) have analysed the implementation of real-time settle-


ment of banks using distributed ledger technology (Blockchain technology) and have highlighted the
potential to considerably lower the cost of financial transactions associated with fund transfers, either
bank-to-bank or cross-border transactions. They further argue that innovations built on Blockchain
technology will lead to “value movement,” providing a way for financial transactions to be carried
out as seamlessly as information movement over the Internet. While these innovations are still at
early stages, their potential impacts on lowering the cost and time of financial transacting could lead
to significantly increased productivity and enhanced economic activity.
As discussed earlier, the transactions on a distributed ledger or database which underpins Block-


chain technology are cleared using a “protocol” or set of automated rules, instead of needing a central
intermediary to execute and confirm transactions. Such “protocol” can be adapted to financial pay-
ment systems using fiat currencies (such as A$ or US$) to settle transactions between parties without
necessarily using digital currencies (Gifford & Cheng, 2016).
There are, nevertheless, always operational and technical risks associated with the adoption of new


approaches such as Blockchain technology in financial transactions. Gifford and Cheng (2016) point
out that one of the principal risks of using Blockchain technology lies in the application of relevant
laws and regulations to financial transactions involving the use of this mechanism. Crucial to a dis-
tributed financial transfer framework is the question of certainty and clarity as to the participating
parties’ or entities’ rights and liabilities. Addressing these critical issues requires appropriate industry,
legal, regulatory and policy frameworks at domestic and international level (Gifford & Cheng, 2016).
A particularly interesting possibility is that lowered transaction costs due to the use of Blockchain


technology could help generate the conditions for the creation of new products and services. Gifford
and Cheng (2016) point out that innovations which are already in the development stage that foster
Blockchain-type technology include applications for the integration of physical and technological sys-
tems (often referred to as the Internet of Things). These applications would permit functionalities such
as enhanced collateral management and greater automation of trade finance, and smart contracts that
can streamline various finance-related processes (Gifford & Cheng, 2016). Indeed, in this paper, we
particularly focus on the potential reduction in transaction costs, such as the cost of verification and
cost of networking, due to the use of a distributed ledger technology which underpins the use of
Blockchain (Catalini & Gans, 2016). This is further elaborated in the Section 3.
Blockchain-based smart contracts are contracts that are executed automatically and are supervised


by the consensus of the decentralised Blockchain network. Smart contracts facilitate, verify or enforce
the negotiation or performance of a contract (Davidson et al., 2016).
Given this background, Davidson et al. (2016) argue that Blockchain is in a sense a new type of rule


system for economic coordination. According to these analysts, alongside firms, markets, clubs, com-
mons and governments, we now also have Blockchains.


2.3. Productivity Gains due to ICT/Digital Technology
Several studies have estimated the potential contribution of the ICT/digital technologies to the
domestic economic growth and improvements to industry productivity. For example, according to
the Productivity Commission (2004), increased use of ICT/digital technology can contribute to both
increased output and input productivity growth. Increased output growth will come from any effect
that increased ICT/digital technology use has on input growth and multifactor productivity (MFP)
growth. It has been estimated that the contribution of ICT/digital technology use to the acceleration
in Australia’s annual MFP growth is around 0.1–0.2 of a percentage point (Parham, Roberts & Sun,


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


156 ECONOMIC PAPERS JUNE










2001; Parham, 2002). Furthermore, growth in ICT use in Australia accounted for about 0.07 of a per-
centage point of annual market sector MFP growth and about 0.02 of a percentage point of annual
finance and insurance sector MFP growth (Productivity Commission, 2004).
According to the econometric analysis undertaken by the Productivity Commission (2004) across


major industry groups in Australia, ICT uptake had a statistically significant association with more
skilled managers and workforce. Another potentially important complementary input is of an organi-
sational nature that goes beyond the skills and experience of the personnel within a firm. How firms
learnt from their experience of success and failure, a form of accumulation of “organisational capi-
tal,” was also seen as an important influence on investment in ICT over time (Productivity Commis-
sion, 2004). Based on a cross-country regression, Bean (2000) has estimated that the increase in ICT
investment contributed 0.12 of a percentage point to MFP growth (see Productivity Commission,
2004). In general, the estimates of the percentages added to GDP by Internet-related value for various
developed economies range from 1.4 for Turkey to 7.2 for the United States, with Australia at 3.6 per
cent (OECD, 2013).
Further, some estimates suggest that the digital economy can contribute $27 billion in productivity


benefits to Australian businesses and government entities (Deloitte Access Economics, 2011). Other
estimates indicate that through the impact of the digital economy, Australia could return back to its
long-term productivity growth rate of 1.7 per cent per year by 2020 (IBIS World, 2012). In this
respect, Griffith et al., (2013) point out that the rollout of the national broadband network in Aus-
tralia together with the adoption of smart digital services has the potential to assist the agricultural
sector improve its productivity. They argue that while computing and sensor technologies have been
used on Australian farms for the last several decades, adoption has been uneven and the full potential
of this change is as yet unrealised.
Keogh and Henry (2016) report that the extent of productivity gains due to the use of digital agri-


culture systems in order to implement more intensive and data-driven farm management decisions in
Australia, can range from ten to fifteen per cent in cropping systems, with about half the gains com-
ing from input efficiencies, and the other half from increases in output.
The relationship between Blockchain technology and productivity growth in the grains sector


(which is the focus of this paper) is underpinned by the processes whereby adoption of this innova-
tive digital technology changes the grain trading/marketing systems. This process involves a Block-
chain technology-driven lowering of the transaction costs between the grain growers/sellers and
buyers which facilitates prompt and speedy payment for grain sales.
It is important to recognise that lower transaction costs in grain trading (driven by the use of Block-


chain technology) are likely to lower the overall cost of grain trading services for the growers by
affecting their requirement for labour, capital and other inputs per unit of grain output sold.
These factors are likely to contribute favourably towards the financial position of the grain growers,


with flow on impacts on their farm business activities. Better farm business performance is likely to
favourably influence farm resources allocation and the requirement for scarce land, labour, other
inputs and capital resources per unit of grain output.
It is expected that these factors in turn reflect an incentive for growers to increase grain output rel-


ative to what would otherwise be. The aggregate of these changes determines changes in productivity
and other performance indicators, such as profitability.
Of considerable concern is that it has been pointed out that the rate of digitisation in Australian


industries is uneven, and is still therefore some distance away from realising its full potential.
Whereas knowledge-intensive industries like financial and professional services have taken a lead in
this area, construction and agriculture have only developed low levels of digitisation (McKinsey &
Company, 2017).
It has been shown that the Australian finance and insurance sector performs strongly through its


focus on its digital supply chain, and is evidencing benefits from its digital spending on workers and
assets. Exceptions are for digital transactions and customer service interactions. This latter observa-
tion suggests that the finance and insurance sector still have significant work to do in achieving inter-
national best practice in levels of digital sales and service (McKinsey & Company, 2017).


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


2020 BLOCKCHAIN ADOPTION IN AUSTRALIAN GRAINS 157














3. Analysing the Economic Effects of Blockchain Use
In this paper, we use the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) model (Hertel, 1997) to analyse the
economic effects of Blockchain use in the Australian grains sector. The standard GTAP model is a
widely used computable general equilibrium (CGE) tool for economy-wide global market analysis,
being a multiregional and multi-sectoral general equilibrium model of the global economy. We follow
Valenzuela and Anderson’s (2011) methodology to construct a projection of the world economy to
2030, and use it as our baseline scenario. The GTAP database version of the model used in this paper
comprises a ten-region by seven-sector aggregation of the global trade analysis project database, ver-
sion 9 (Aguiar et al., 2016). The ten regions include Australia, Rest of Oceania, the United States, Rest
of North America, Central and South America, Europe, Asia, Africa, Middle East and Rest of the
World. The seven sectors include grains, other crops, rest of the other primary commodities, light
manufacturing, heavy manufacturing, financial services and other services.
We quantify the potential economic effects of Blockchain use in the Australian grains sector by


using the GTAP model, and undertaking the following illustrative scenarios:


1 Blockchain use (grains) scenario: productivity in the Australian grains sector is assumed to
increase by five per cent over ten years (2020–2030) resulting from the adoption of Blockchain
technology in trading activities of grain producers. The assumed productivity growth rates are
illustrative only. Our premise here is that, given historical trends in productivity improvements in
key industry sectors due to ICT/digital technology adoption (Bean, 2000; Parham, Roberts & Sun,
2001; Parham, 2002; Productivity Commission, 2004; OECD, 2013; Keogh & Henry, 2016), it is
plausible to assume that greater adoption in the Australian grains sector of emerging digital tech-
nologies such as Blockchain technology will result in further enhancement of productivity as
assumed in this illustrative scenario;


2 Blockchain use (finance) scenario: productivity in the Australian financial sector is assumed to
increase by five per cent over ten years (2020–2030) due to the adoption of Blockchain technology
in the financial sector resulting in lower transaction costs facing the grains producers. The assumed
productivity growth rates are illustrative only. Our premise here is that, given historical trends in
productivity improvements in the finance sector due to ICT/digital technology adoption (based on
Productivity Commission, 2004; McKinsey & Company, 2017), it is plausible to assume that
greater adoption in the Australian financial sector of emerging digital technologies such as Block-
chain technology in digital sales and services (including digital transactions and customer service
interactions) will result in further enhancement of productivity as assumed in this illustrative
scenario;


3 Combined scenario: this scenario combines scenarios 1 and 2.


Our premise here is that these three illustrative scenarios will provide some insights into the plausi-
ble and likely magnitude of productivity effects that approximate or reflect potential productivity
enhancements in the Australian grains sector resulting from widespread use of Blockchain technol-
ogy over the medium term. This perspective is combined here with the expectation that productivity
in the Australian finance sector will also expand due to widespread use of Blockchain technology in
that sector over the medium term with flow on beneficial impacts on grain trading with the use of
enhanced digital transactions and reduced transaction costs.


4. Simulation Results
The simulation results are presented in Table 1. They indicate that an assumed modest growth (i.e.,
five per cent) in productivity due to the adoption of Blockchain technology in the Australian grains
sector could potentially raise the output in the sector by over eight per cent over the medium term
relative to what would otherwise be. If this is accompanied by a similar rate of growth in productivity
in the Australian finance sector, it could further raise the grains output to a 9.7 per cent increase. This
reflects the potential reduction in transaction costs associated with the use of Blockchain technology
as a “distributed ledger technology” in grain trading.


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


158 ECONOMIC PAPERS JUNE


























These assumed combined productivity enhancements could potentially lead to an estimated rise in
GDP of 2.6 per cent with considerable enhancement in economic welfare, relative to what would
otherwise be.
The simulation results shown in Table 1 also highlight the high level of economy-wide potential


beneficial impacts of Blockchain-driven productivity enhancement of the Australian finance sector
(i.e., an estimated US$ 58 billion rise on economic welfare, relative to what would otherwise be). This
highlights the broader economy-wide potential ramifications of greater adoption in the Australian
financial sector of emerging digital technologies such as Blockchain technology in digital sales and
services (including digital transactions and customer service interactions).


5. Discussion and Conclusions
It is estimated that it takes around three to four weeks on average to settle financial payments in the
grains sector at present (without the use of Blockchain technology; see https://blog.agridigital.io/bloc
kchain-solutions-for-the-australian-grains-industry-be871e1aef99). The wheat trading case study
noted earlier in this paper highlights the potential ability of the use of Blockchain technology in the
grains sector to facilitate prompt and speedy payment for output sales. However, it is also important
to recognise that investment in digital technologies and related services in the Australian agriculture
is relatively low compared to other sectors (Productivity Commission, 2004). Hence, there is signifi-
cant scope for further expansion in the use of digital technologies (including the use of Blockchain
technology) along agricultural supply chains.
As discussed in this paper, the reduction in transaction costs associated with the use of Blockchain


technology as a “distributed ledger technology” implies that, for example, in grain trading, farmers
receive their returns from selling their grain promptly without a delay. Our economy-wide analysis
has tried to reflect the speedy settlement of payments to grain farmers by simulating it as a plausible
productivity improvement in the financial transaction services sector which provide such services to
the farm sector. Our simulation results illustrate that potential medium-term impacts of the adoption
of Blockchain technology in the Australian grains and finance sectors could be in the range of a rise
in grains output of close to ten per cent, with an estimated rise in GDP of 2.6 per cent.
There are several caveats to the impacts of this medium-term prognosis for the adoption of Block-


chain technology. According to the International Finance Corporation (2017b), adoption of Block-
chain technology is likely to be gradual over the next five to ten years. There are various challenges
that stand in the way of its widespread adoption. These challenges range from those related to techni-
cal and regulatory issues, to those associated with legal and policy issues (Bohme et al., 2015; Gifford
& Cheng, 2016; Mazzone, 2017; Pisa & Juden, 2017; International Finance Corporation, 2017b).
One of the key technical challenges relates to moving from the application of Blockchain technol-


ogy at pilot project level to large-scale applications. The extent of this scalability problem is intimately
influenced by the speed of the network, in conjunction with the need for data privacy, operational
resiliency and governance issues (see Pisa & Juden, 2017). It must not be overlooked that, according
to the International Finance Corporation (2017b), the consensus-based nature of the validation pro-
cesses in Blockchain means that it needs substantial computational power. This implies that there will
be considerable use of electricity (Bohme et al., 2015), and inevitably, the transaction speed will be


Table 1. Economic effects of Blockchain use in the Australian grains sector (relative to the baseline case)


Scenario Change in Australian


grains output (%)


Change in economic


welfare (US$ m)


Change in


GDP (%)


5% productivity gain in grains sector 8.68 432 0.03


5% productivity gain in the finance sector 1.01 58,782 2.53


Combined 5% productivity gain in both


grains and the finance sectors


9.68 59,651 2.55


Source: Authors’ simulations using the GTAP model and a projected world economy to 2030.


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


2020 BLOCKCHAIN ADOPTION IN AUSTRALIAN GRAINS 159



https://blog.agridigital.io/blockchain-solutions-for-the-australian-grains-industry-be871e1aef99









https://blog.agridigital.io/blockchain-solutions-for-the-australian-grains-industry-be871e1aef99




slowed as the demand for data storage expands. This can generate major technical barriers to the scal-
ability of the Blockchain adoption and to achieving required economies of scale.
In their review of literature on the use of Blockchain technology in agri-food value chain manage-


ment, Zhao et al., (2019) have identified several challenges including storage capacity and scalability,
privacy leakage, high cost and regulation problem and lack of skills.
Kamilaris et al., (2019) argue that in order to lower the barriers to Blockchain use, public sector


investment is needed in research and innovation, as well as in education and training, in order to pro-
duce and demonstrate evidence for the potential benefits of this technology. From a policy perspec-
tive, actions that can be taken include encouraging the growth of Blockchain-minded ecosystems in
agri-food chains, supporting the technology as part of the general goals of optimising the competitive-
ness and ensuring the sustainability of the agri-food supply chain, as well as designing a clear regula-
tory framework for Blockchain implementations. The economic sustainability of existing Blockchain
initiatives needs to be assessed, and the outcomes of such assessments are expected to influence the
popularity of the Blockchain technology in the near future, applied in the food supply chain domain
(Kamilaris et al., 2019).
Sylvester (2019) points out that the key elements to support the adoption of Blockchain technology


in agriculture such as high-quality data, enabling policies and regulations, should be first addressed in
order to ensure the maximum efficacy for smart contracts. The process of designing, verifying, imple-
menting and enforcing smart contracts in traditional agricultural value chains is still a work in pro-
gress, with only a few pilot implementations to show proof-of-concept.
As this technology is more widely adopted, the issue of “interoperability” will be critical for Block-


chain flexibility, where connectivity between different Blockchains must be ensured. While the tech-
nology required for the demands of interoperability is still in its pilot phase, there are initiatives
underway in the financial services sector to address this issue by using, for example, an “open stan-
dards” approach (Gifford & Cheng, 2016).


REFERENCES
AgriDigital and CBH Group (2017), ‘Pilot Report: Solving for Supply Chain Inefficiencies and Risks with Block-


chain in Agriculture’, November, Available at: https://daks2k3a4ib2z.cloudfront.net/593ba04f0052061059d
5383e/5a0be176b08b700001502550_AgriDigital%20and%20CBH%20Blockchain%20Pilot%20Report.pdf.


Aguiar, A., Narayanan, B. and McDougall, R. (2016), ‘An Overview of the GTAP 9 Data Base’, Journal of Global Eco-
nomic Analysis, 1 (1), 81–208.


Antonucci, F., Figorilli, S., Costa, C., Pallottino, F., Raso, L. and Menesatti, P. (2019), ‘A Review of Blockchain
Applications in the Agri-Food Sector’, Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 99 (14), 6129–38.


Australian Financial Review (2016), ‘Wheat Farmers Trial Blockchain to Sell Grain and Find it is Fast and Reli-
able’, 21 December. Available at: http://www.afr.com/technology/wheat-farmers-trial-blockchain-to-sell-grain-
and-find-it-is-fast-and-reliable-20161206-gt57lx.


Bean, C. (2000), ‘The Australian Economic ‘Miracle’: A View from the North’, in Gruen, D. and Shrestha, S.
(eds.), The Australian Economy in the 1990s, Conference Proceedings, 24–25 July. Reserve Bank of Australia, Syd-
ney; 73–114. Available at: https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2000/pdf/bean.pdf


Bohme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B. and Moore, T. (2015), ‘Bitcoin: Economics, Technology and Governance’,
Journal of Economic Perspective, 28 (2), 213–38.


Catalini, C. and Gans, J.S. (2016), ‘Some Simple Economics of the Blockchain’, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 22952, December, Available at: http://nber.org/papers/w22952.


Davidson, S., De Filippi, P. and Potts, J. (2016), ‘Economics of Blockchain’, US. Proceedings of Public Choice Con-
ference, 2016, Fort Lauderdale, May, Available at: http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01382002.


Deloitte Access Economics (2011), ‘The Connected Continent: How the Internet is Transforming the Australian
Economy’, August, Available at: http://www.deloitte.com/assets/DcomAustralia/Local%20Assets/Documents/
Services/Corporate%20Finance/Access%20Economics/Deloitte_The_Connected_Continent_Aug_2011.pdf.


Gifford, K. and Cheng, J. (2016), ‘Implementation of Real-Time Settlement for Bank using Decentralised Ledger
Technology: Policy and Legal Implications’, Financial Stability Review, 20, 143–51.


Griffith, C., Heydon, G., Lamb, D., Lefort, L., Taylor, K. and Trotter, M. (2013), Smart Farming: Leveraging the Impact
of Broadband and the Digital Economy. CSIRO and University of New England, New England.


Hanson, R.T., Reeson, A. and Staples, M. (2017), Distributed Ledgers, Scenarios for the Australian Economy over the Com-
ing Decades, Data 61. CSIRO, Canberra.


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


160 ECONOMIC PAPERS JUNE



https://daks2k3a4ib2z.cloudfront.net/593ba04f0052061059d5383e/5a0be176b08b700001502550_AgriDigital%2520and%2520CBH%2520Blockchain%2520Pilot%2520Report.pdf

https://daks2k3a4ib2z.cloudfront.net/593ba04f0052061059d5383e/5a0be176b08b700001502550_AgriDigital%2520and%2520CBH%2520Blockchain%2520Pilot%2520Report.pdf

http://www.afr.com/technology/wheat-farmers-trial-blockchain-to-sell-grain-and-find-it-is-fast-and-reliable-20161206-gt57lx

http://www.afr.com/technology/wheat-farmers-trial-blockchain-to-sell-grain-and-find-it-is-fast-and-reliable-20161206-gt57lx

https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2000/pdf/bean.pdf

http://nber.org/papers/w22952

http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01382002

http://www.deloitte.com/assets/DcomAustralia/Local%2520Assets/Documents/Services/Corporate%2520Finance/Access%2520Economics/Deloitte_The_Connected_Continent_Aug_2011.pdf

http://www.deloitte.com/assets/DcomAustralia/Local%2520Assets/Documents/Services/Corporate%2520Finance/Access%2520Economics/Deloitte_The_Connected_Continent_Aug_2011.pdf




Hertel, T.W. (ed.) (1997), Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
and New York.


Iansiti, M. and Lakhani, K.R. (2017), ‘The Truth about Blockchain’, Harvard Business Review, 1 (January-February
Issue), 118–127.


IBIS World (2012), ‘A Snapshot of Australia’s Digital Future to 2050’, June 2012. Available at: http://www.ibm.c
om/au/pdf/1206_AustDigitalFuture_A4_FINALonline.pdf.


International Finance Corporation (2017a), ‘Blockchain in Development-Part I: A New Mechanism of ‘Trust’?’,
Center for Global Development, Note 40, July, Available at: https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/6e79f6c3-
dac6-4e94-8cea-2bb21185df92/EMCompass+Note+40+Blockchain+Part+I.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.


International Finance Corporation (2017b), ‘Blockchain in Development-Part II: How it can Impact Emerging
Markets’, Center for Global Development, Note 41, July, Available at: https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/1f
324bb2-9a12-4d74-ac0b-65ff0fd560c7/EMCompass+Note+41+Blockchain+Part+II.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.


Kamilaris, A., Fonts, A. and Prenafeta-Boldύ, F.X. (2019), ‘The Rise of Blockchain Technology in Agriculture and
Food Supply Chains’, Trends in Food Science & Technology, 91, 640–652.


Keogh, M. and Henry, M. (2016), The Implications of Digital Agriculture and Big Data for Australian Agriculture,
Research Report, Australian Farm Institute, Sydney. ISBN 978-1-921808-38-8 (Print and Web).


Kim, H.M. and Laskowski, M. (2017), ‘Towards an Ontology-Driven Blockchain Design for Supply Chain Prove-
nance’, Proceedings of the 26th Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems (WITS), Dublin, Ireland, December
15-16. Available at: http://blockchain.lab.yorku.ca/files/2017/02/wits-2.


Mazzone, C. (2017), ‘Europe and Blockchains: Keep Trust in Disruptions’, Presentation at Decentralized 2017, 2–3
November, Limassol, Cyprus. Available at: https://www.decentralized.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Chia
ra-Mazzone-Europe-and-blockchains_keep-trust-in-disruptions.pdf.


McKinsey and Company (2017), ‘Digital Australia: Seizing the Opportunity from the Fourth Industrial Revolu-
tion’, Available at: http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/asia-pacific/digital-australia-seizing-opportunity-
from-the-fourth-industrial-revolution.


North, D. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
OECD (2013), ‘Measuring the Internet Economy: A Contribution to the Research Agenda’, OECD Digital Economy


Papers, No. 226, OECD Publishing, Paris, Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k43gjg6r8jf-en.
Parham, D. (2002), ‘Productivity Gains: Importance of ICTs’, Agenda, 9 (3), 195–210.
Parham, D., Roberts, P. and Sun, H. (2001), Information Technology and Australia’s Productivity Surge, Productivity


Commission Staff Research Paper, AusInfo, Canberra.
Pearce, R. (2018), ‘Commonwealth Bank Reveals Details of Block Chian-Based Trade Pilot’, Computerworld, 30


July. Available at: https://www.computerworld.com.au/article/print/644499/commonwealth-bank-reveals-de
tail-blockchain-based-trade-pilot/.


Pisa, M. and Juden, M. (2017), ‘Blockchain and Economic Development: Hype vs. Reality’, Center for Global
Development Policy Paper 107, July, Washington DC.


Productivity Commission (2004), ICT Use and Productivity: A Synthesis from Studies of Australian Firms. Commission
Research Paper, Canberra.


Staples, M., Chen, S., Falamki, S., Ponomarev, A., Rimba, P., Tran, A.B., Weber, I., Xu, X. and Zhu, J. (2017), Risks
and Opportunities for System using Blockchain and Smart Contracts. Data 61, CSIRO, Sydney.


Suikkanen, H. (2017), ‘Economic and Institutional Implications of Blockchain’, Master’s Thesis, School of Eco-
nomics, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland. Available at: https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/
28718/master_Suikkanen_Henrik_2017.pdf?sequence=1.


Sylvester, G. (2019), ‘Agriculture: Opportunities for Blockchain Technology’, in Sylvester, D. (ed.), E-Agriculture in
Action: Blockchain for Agriculture - Opportunities and Challenges. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Telecommunication Union, Bangkok; 7–10. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/
CA2906EN/ca2906en.pdf


Valenzuela, E. and Anderson, K. (2011), ‘Projecting the World Economy to 2050: Agriculture in the Economy-
wide GTAP Model’, Discussion Paper 1101, Centre for International Economic Studies, University of Adelaide,
March.


Weston, E. (2018), ‘Blockchain and What it Could Mean for Agriculture: Applications for Blockchain in Australian
Agriculture’, Presentation at the 2018 Australian Cotton Conference, 7–9, August, Gild Coast. Available at:
http://australiancottonconference.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Emma-Weston.pdf.


Williamson, O.E. (1973), ‘Markets and Hierarchies: Some Elementary Considerations’, American Economic Review,
63 (2), 316–25.


Williamson, O.E. (1975),Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free Press, New York.
Williamson, O.E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Free Press, New York.
Zhao, G., Liu, S., Lopez, C., Lu, H., Elgueta, S., Chen, H. and Boshkoska, B.M. (2019), ‘Blockchain Technology in


Agri-Food Value Chain Management: A Synthesis of Applications, Challenges and Future Research Directions’,
Computers in Industry, 109, 83–99.


! 2020 The Economic Society of Australia


2020 BLOCKCHAIN ADOPTION IN AUSTRALIAN GRAINS 161



http://www.ibm.com/au/pdf/1206_AustDigitalFuture_A4_FINALonline.pdf

http://www.ibm.com/au/pdf/1206_AustDigitalFuture_A4_FINALonline.pdf

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/6e79f6c3-dac6-4e94-8cea-2bb21185df92/EMCompass+Note+40+Blockchain+Part+I.pdf?MOD=AJPERES

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/6e79f6c3-dac6-4e94-8cea-2bb21185df92/EMCompass+Note+40+Blockchain+Part+I.pdf?MOD=AJPERES

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/1f324bb2-9a12-4d74-ac0b-65ff0fd560c7/EMCompass+Note+41+Blockchain+Part+II.pdf?MOD=AJPERES

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/1f324bb2-9a12-4d74-ac0b-65ff0fd560c7/EMCompass+Note+41+Blockchain+Part+II.pdf?MOD=AJPERES

http://blockchain.lab.yorku.ca/files/2017/02/wits-2

https://www.decentralized.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Chiara-Mazzone-Europe-and-blockchains_keep-trust-in-disruptions.pdf

https://www.decentralized.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Chiara-Mazzone-Europe-and-blockchains_keep-trust-in-disruptions.pdf

http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/asia-pacific/digital-australia-seizing-opportunity-from-the-fourth-industrial-revolution

http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/asia-pacific/digital-australia-seizing-opportunity-from-the-fourth-industrial-revolution

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k43gjg6r8jf-en

https://www.computerworld.com.au/article/print/644499/commonwealth-bank-reveals-detail-blockchain-based-trade-pilot/

https://www.computerworld.com.au/article/print/644499/commonwealth-bank-reveals-detail-blockchain-based-trade-pilot/

https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/28718/master_Suikkanen_Henrik_2017.pdf?sequence=1

https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/28718/master_Suikkanen_Henrik_2017.pdf?sequence=1

http://www.fao.org/3/CA2906EN/ca2906en.pdf

http://www.fao.org/3/CA2906EN/ca2906en.pdf

http://australiancottonconference.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Emma-Weston.pdf


