









Blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management:
A synthesis of applications, challenges and future research directions


Guoqing Zhaoa,*, Shaofeng Liua, Carmen Lopezb, Haiyan Lua, Sebastian Elguetac,d,
Huilan Chena, Biljana Mileva Boshkoskae,f
a Plymouth Business School, University of Plymouth, UK
bBrighton Business School, University of Brighton, UK
c Laboratory of Pesticide Residue and Environment, Instituto de Investigaciones Agropecuarias, INIA, La Platina, 11610, Chile
d Facultad de Veterinaria y Agronomía, Universidad de Las Américas, Sede Providencia, Manuel Montt 948, Santiago, Chile
e Faculty of Information Studies in Novo mesto, Ljubljanska cesta 31a, SI-8000, Novo mesto, Slovenia
f Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000, Ljubjana, Slovenia


A R T I C L E I N F O


Article history:
Received 20 September 2018
Received in revised form 27 March 2019
Accepted 4 April 2019
Available online 3 May 2019


Keywords:
Blockchain technology
Systematic literature network analysis
Industry 4.0
Internet of things (IoT)
Agri-food value chain digitisation


A B S T R A C T


Agri-food value chain is an area of significant importance because of providing sustainable, affordable,
safety and sufficient food, feed, fibre and fuel to consumers, it is critical to ensure these value chains
running smoothly and successfully by applying advanced internet technologies. Blockchain technology is
a new digital technological approach underpinned by the Industry 4.0 to ensuring data integrity and
preventing tampering and single point failure through offering fault-tolerance, immutability, trust,
transparency and full traceability of the stored transaction records to all agri-food value chain partners.
This paper used systematic literature network analysis to review the state-of-the-art blockchain
technology including its recent advances, main applications in agri-food value chain and challenges from
a holistic perspective. The findings suggest that blockchain technology together with advanced
information and communication technology and internet of things have been adopted for the
improvement of agri-food value chain management in four main aspects: traceability, information
security, manufacturing and sustainable water management. Six challenges have been identified
including storage capacity and scalability, privacy leakage, high cost and regulation problem, throughput
and latency issue, and lack of skills. Based on the critical analysis of literature, research gaps and future
research directions are proposed in this paper regarding the applications and challenges of blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain management. This study makes contributions to the extant literature
in the field of agri-food value chain management by discovering the potential of blockchain technology
and its implications for agri-food value chain performance improvements such as food safety, food
quality and food traceability.


© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


1. Introduction


The agri-food value chain is a complex system responsible for
the circulation of agri-food products from the initial stage of
production to the final stage of consumption. In the circulation
process, value chain members play a critical role in meeting the
consumers’ demand for agri-food products and maintaining the


quality and safety of products [1]. Simultaneously, with the rapid
development of internet technologies in the value chain area, a
large number of emerging technologies such as advanced
information and communication technology (ICT) and the Internet
of Things (IoT) have been applied to the agri-food value chain [46].
However, almost all the systems applied to the agri-food value
chain are centralised, monopolistic, asymmetric and opaque, and
may result in serious trust problem. Therefore, consumers’
confidence towards food safety has been broken after a series of
food safety risk incidents and scandals over the last decades [46],
such as mad cow disease, horsemeat scandal [2], toxic milk
powder, genetically modified food and trench oil [3]. Consequently,
detailed information of agri-food products from farm to fork is
increasingly requested by consumers. Furthermore, how to
build fault-tolerance, immutability, trust, transparency and full


* Corresponding author at: Plymouth Business School, University of Plymouth,
UK.


E-mail addresses: guoqing.zhao@plymouth.ac.uk (G. Zhao),
c.lopez@brighton.ac.uk (C. Lopez), sebastian.elgueta@inia.cl (S. Elgueta),
biljana.mileva@fis.unm.si (B.M. Boshkoska).


@plymouth.ac.uk (G. Zhao), @plymouth.ac.uk (S. Liu)@plymouth.ac.uk (H. Lu)
@plymouth.ac.uk (H. Chen)


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.04.002
0166-3615/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers in Industry


journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/ locate /compind



























http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.compind.2019.04.002&domain=pdf

mailto:guoqing.zhao@plymouth.ac.uk

mailto:c.lopez@brighton.ac.uk

mailto:c.lopez@brighton.ac.uk

mailto:sebastian.elgueta@inia.cl

mailto:biljana.mileva@fis.unm.si

mailto:biljana.mileva@fis.unm.si

https://twitter.com/Zhao

https://twitter.com/Liu

https://twitter.com/Lu

https://twitter.com/Chen

https://twitter.com/Chen

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.04.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.04.002

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615

www.elsevier.com/locate/compind




traceability of agri-food value chain [4], regulations and customers’
expectations towards food quality and food safety [5], the
complexity of agri-food value chain [6], and the current
applications of technologies and their potential issues/pitfalls
[7] have attracted increasing attention from academics and
practitioners.


A potential solution to alleviate the above issues and
concerns is usage of blockchain technology, which is a new
digital technological approach underpinned by the Industry 4.0
to ensuring data integrity and preventing tampering and any
single point failure. Four special elements - decentralised,
immutable, consensus, and democratic that are unique to
blockchain networks that make the technology more attractive
in promoting trust and transparency in the agri-food value chain
fraught with errors, duplication and redundancies [68]. Crosby
et al. [8] underlines thatblockchain is essentially a distributed
database system that records transactional data or other digital
events that have been executed and shared among value chain
participants. It enables agri-food value chain participants to
establish a decentralized consensus on the sequence of events
and the current status of the transaction [9]. Blockchain
technology uses a combination of different technologies that
have been applied in computer science such as public/private
key cryptography, cryptographic hash functions and database
technologies [10], which provides an innovative solution to
achieve food traceability, transparency, safety and security [11].
Two prominent benefits of blockchain technology are that it
provides a permanent transaction records which are grouped
into individual blocks and cannot be tampered with; and it can
replace those traditional paper tracking systems and manual
monitoring systems, so as to prevent the traditional way of the
value chain from suffering the inaccurate impact [39].


The academic interest in investigating the application of
blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management has
been progressively expanded, with a rapid increase in the
contributions of academic experts covering this aspect [11–
13,38]. Moreover, blockchain technology used in the agri-food
value chain seems to be a promising research stream for future
research, especially in the era of Industry 4.0 [14,83]. However,
only a limited number of studies analyse the current applica-
tions and future research directions of blockchain technology in
different industries. We found three reviews concerned with the
blockchain technology and its impact on the social and economy,
drawn up, respectively, by Anascavage and Davis [15], who
identified 16 areas that blockchain technology could be applied
to, including food security; Tama et al. [16] acknowledge four
areas that blockchain technology has been applied to and
considers that blockchain technology plays an important role in
guaranteeing the traceability of the agri-food value chain; and
finally Yli-Huumo et al. [17] conducted a systematic literature
review (SLR) on current research of blockchain technology
including security, wasted resources, usability and privacy.
These reviews are, however, relatively general, and given the
current research and applications of blockchain technology,
none of the reviews addresses the application of the blockchain
technology in the agri-food value chain management. Therefore,
there is a lack of up-to-date reviews that offer a comprehensive
overview of the main issues related to current applications,
challenges and future research directions of the blockchain
technology in the agri-food value chain management.


Considering the above arguments, the main objective of this
study is to fill this gap by offering a systematic literature network
analysis (SLNA) of the recent contributions of blockchain
technology in the agri-food value chain management, highlighting
the research that has been developed over time, and identifying
the challenges of applying blockchain technology to the agri-food


value chain management, and proposing the most promising
research directions for the future.


The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The
methodology adopted in this paper is described in Section 2, while
the application of the research methodology to the context under
study is provided in Section 3. Then, the current applications of
blockchain technology in the agri-food value chain management
are presented in Section 4 followed by the challenges for applying
blockchain technology in the agri-food value chain that are
presented in Section 5. The research gaps and proposed future
research directions are presented in Section 6. Finally, conclusions
and research limitations are drawn in Section 7.


2. Research methodology: systematic literature network
analysis


Systematic literature network analysis (SLNA) is constituted
with two methods: systematic literature review (SLR) and
citation network analysis (CNA). The purpose of integrating
these two existing methodologies (SLR and CNA) is to maximize
the advantages related to each of them: SLR provides a
reproducible and rigorous method that is applied in this study
to select the most relevant and high-quality studies from
previous literature of blockchain technology in agri-food value
chain management. Through synthesising of the literatures, the
state-of-the-art of applications and the challenges to apply
blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management will
be revealed. Simultaneously, why blockchain technology matters
in agri-food value chain management is also disclosed. CNA offers
an evidence-based approach to identifying the most-cited
studies from the selected databases, revealing the contributions
on blockchain technology theory building in the agri-food value
chain management as well as suggesting future research
directions that can facilitate the application of the blockchain
technology to the agri-food value chain management [18]. The
process of SLNA from the combination of SLR and CNA is shown
in Fig. A1.


3. Applying the SLNA to the area under study


The process of how to apply SLNA to the area of blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain management is described in
the following five sub-sections.


3.1. Formulating the research questions


The first stage of conducting SLNA is to formulate research
questions. It is important to have well-specified, informative and
clearly formulated research questions to avoid bias, error and
ambiguity [19]. Therefore, the research questions were formulated
based on the following process: (1) Brainstorming all types of
applications of blockchain technology that can be used in agri-food
value chain management; (2) Consulting with three experts in
academia and agri-food industry to evaluate whether it is possible
to apply the blockchain technology in these areas; (3) Examining
possible applications of blockchain technology that can be applied
to the agri-food value chain management. Based on the above
processes and principles, the following research questions were
formulated:


RQ1. What are the main applications of blockchain technology
that have been developed in agri-food value chain management?


RQ2. What are the key challenges for applying blockchain
technology to agri-food value chain management?


RQ3. What are the research gaps and future research directions
for applying blockchain technology to agri-food value chain
management?


84 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99


































3.2. Locating study


Denyer and Tranfield [20] proposed that a comprehensive list of
core contributions is necessary to answer the review questions by
searching the most relevant and high-quality studies. Eight
databases were selected for literature search, including Science-
Direct, Web of Science, Scopus, Taylor & Francis Online, Wiley
Online Library, Emerald, Google Scholar and IEEE Xplore. The
rationale for selecting these databases is that they include the top
science and technology journals, conference proceedings and
business research journals.


Consistent with other SLR papers in blockchain technology (e.g.
[17,21,22]), the identified keywords were used as the search
criteria in our review. Since the aim of this research is to identify
the main issues relating to the applications of blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain management, a combination
of “blockchain” and “agri-food value chain management”, with all
the related terms were used for searching the title, keywords and
abstract in the selected electronic academic databases. These
keywords were combined later through Boolean connectors to
constitute different search strings to be applied in the databases.
Furthermore, consultation with various practitioners and academ-
ics in the relevant field was conducted to confirm whether search
strings were also necessary. Finally, a total of 45 search strings
were identified by the authors to be included in the search process.
A full list of search strings is shown in Table 1.


3.3. Study selection and evaluation


As a very recent and new research area, as discussed earlier, the
term of blockchain technology was first coined in 2008 [16]. In fact,
the idea of blockchain technology was hardly discussed before 2008.
Therefore, we use the year 2008 as the starting point to search
relevant publications. Further, to find more relevant and important
studies to be included in the analysis, various reference types such as
journal papers, conference papers and book chapters were included
in the systematic review. Simultaneously, the identification of key
articles and book chapters that provide background information on
blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management were
found from different sources, including colleagues working in the
same field. The initial search with the specified keywords and open
access in the selected eight databases from 2008 to 2018 resulted in a
preliminary sample of 632 contributions.


Afterwards, each study was checked by three authors by
carefully analysing the abstracts, introductions and conclusions to
reduce any subjective bias and enhance validity. Moreover,
relevant book chapters and other publications that were not
covered by the databases were then identified through carefully
searching the references used in the previous literature (e.g.
[17,21,22]). The review of the work of influential authors in the
field of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain manage-
ment was also carried out by the same three authors. A series of
inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied to include/exclude
papers (Table 2), which were built through a brainstorming session
among these three authors. Studies that do not meet the inclusion
criteria or duplicates or non-relevant studies were eliminated. As a
result, 62 studies were finally selected.


All selected 62 studies were read entirely by the three authors
independently. By cross-referencing all the citations and refer-
ences and talking with experts in the experts from academia and
the agri-food industry, nine additional studies were identified and
added, resulting in a total of 71 academic peer-reviewed journal
papers, conference papers and book chapters to be included in the
analysis. The search and selection process is presented in Fig. A2.


3.4. Citation network analysis (CNA)


CNA is an effective and efficient way to reveal the articles that
represent the basis of the field and to identify which articles
were used by many other authors for the development of their
contributions [18]. The citation data (author, title, year, cited
reference, source, time cited etc.) were collected from the Web of
Science Core collection. Then, the software Gephi was used to build
a citation network among the selected studies. Gephi is the leading
visualization and exploration software for all graphs and networks,
which can be applied to six main areas such as exploratory data
analysis, link analysis, social network analysis, biological network
analysis, and poster creation [23]. The rationale for this choice is
that Gephi can provide large information handling capacity,
friendly graphical user interface and high-quality output formats
[24]. As shown in Fig. 1, a network consisting of 71 nodes was
constructed. It comprises 47 connected components and 24
isolated components.


From the Fig.1, we can see that the connected components were
divided into seven clusters according to their citation information.
For example, the orange cluster summarized the opportunities that


Table 1
Search strings for databases search.


Keywords “blockchain”, “information security”, “information transparency”, “agriculture”, “agricultural”, “agribusiness”, “agriculture safety”, “agriculture security”,
“agriculture traceability”, “food safety”, “food security”, “food traceability”, “food supply”, “food trade”, “food value chain management”, “agriculture value
chain management”, “agri-food value chain management”, “agricultural trade”


Databases ScienceDirect, Web of Science, Scopus, Taylor & Francis Online, Wiley Online Library, Emerald, Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore
Search
strings


(“blockchain” OR “information security” OR “information transparency”) AND (“agriculture” OR “agricultural” OR “agribusiness” OR “agriculture safety” OR
“agriculture security” OR “food safety” OR “food security” OR “food traceability” OR “food supply” OR “food trade” OR “agriculture traceability” OR “food
value chain management” OR “agriculture value chain management” OR “agri-food value chain management” OR “agriculture trade”)


Table 2
Criteria for inclusion or exclusion studies.


Inclusion criteria Rationale


Articles were published in peer-reviewed journals, conference
proceedings and book chapters in English


Peer-reviewed journals, conference papers and book chapters are considered to have better
quality than non-peer-reviewed articles


Articles were published between 2008 and 2018 The year 2008 was selected as the starting point as the term blockchain was coined in 2008 [16]
The selected articles contain at least one keyword in their title or
abstract


Abstract or title focusing on the applications of blockchain technology was selected


Judge relevance by fully reading all remaining abstract, introduction
and conclusion


The remaining abstract, introduction and conclusion focusing on the applications of blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain were selected


Judge relevance by fully reading all remaining articles Articles focusing on the applications of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain were
selected


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 85






blockchain technology could be applied in agri-food value chain
management such as blockchain combined with IoT to be used in
agri-food value chain, as well as used in agri-food value chain
traceability. It is important to note that most of the papers included
in this cluster were literature review papers [17,25,26]. A detailed
analysis of benefits, opportunities and challenges of integrating
blockchain technology with IoT were discussed in the cluster of
black. There were four clusters (Light green, purple, red and blue)
mainly discussed how to use blockchain technology to increase the
agri-food value chain traceability and manufacturing conceptually
and empirically. Simultaneously, different traceability models
were proposed and tested. Finally, the green cluster represents
how blockchain along with other technologies such as Big Data,
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Internet of Things served as an
engine of the 4th industrial revolution, and how these technologies
can revolutionize the current agri-food value chain management
[27,28]. The detailed information of each cluster is shown in
Table 3.


As blockchain technology has gained increasing attention from
researchers and practitioners, in 2016 Yli-Huumo et al. [17]
proposed an SLR on blockchain technology by highlighting current
research topics, challenges and future research directions from a
technological perspective. Their research results indicate four
research gaps existing in the current study: (1) Lack of high-quality
journal papers, most of the papers are published in conferences,


symposiums and workshops; (2) The majority of current research
is conducted in Bitcoin environment, rather than in other
blockchain environments; (3) Lack of research on usability; (4)
No research on the challenges for applying blockchain technology,
such as latency, throughput and bandwidth.


Following Yli-Huumo et al. [17], a series of research articles
attempt to fill the research gaps. Tian [38] and Faye [39] have
explored the field of blockchain technology in the context of the
agri-food value chain from a traceability perspective. The issue
addressed is how to embed blockchain technology in the current
traceability system to increase the transparency and security of the
agri-food value chain. With the evolution of research in the
blockchain-based traceability system, some researchers tried to
examine some generic models for facilitating the development of
blockchain-based traceability system, such as the “TRADE” model
proposed by Maouchi et al. [36]. Concerns about integrating
blockchain technology in the agri-food value chain need to be
addressed from a single company perspective firstly, therefore,
Hamida et al. [40] provided a detailed analysis on enterprise
blockchains of its applications, challenges and opportunities. It is
interesting to note that within these studies, the paper An agri-food
supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID & blockchain
technology proposed by Tian [38] is the most frequently cited
paper, which has been cited 16 times by other authors among the
selected papers (Table 4). At the current stage of research in


Fig. 1. Citation network among the selected studies.
Note: Node size depends on the quantity of connected components.


86 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99






blockchain technology for traceability, most researchers (e.g. [38–
40]) considered blockchain technology as a competitive advantage
for agriculture value chain participants to gain trust from
customers. Finally, most of these articles focus on addressing
blockchain-based traceability system from the perspective of
conceptual development.


Another stream of research examines how to combine
blockchain technology with the IoT that can be applied in
agri-food value chain management. Christidis and Devetsikiotis
[41] noted that the combination of blockchain technology with
IoT would allow agri-food value chain participants to get
automated time-consuming workflows in a new and unique
way, as well as to reduce significant costs in the process.
Following Christidis and Devetsikiotis [41], many researchers
have tried to contribute the theory-building of integrating
blockchain technology with IoT from different perspectives.
Hammi et al. [49] explored how to improve trust relationship
among agri-food value chain members by designing a block-
chain-IoT application. Reyna et al. [50] investigated how
blockchain technology could potentially improve the IoT. Finally,
Davcev et al. [30] proposed a blockchain-based distributed
cloud/fog platform for IoT to enable grape value chain. The
research trends on blockchain-based IoT has been from
generally discussing the challenges and opportunities for
combining blockchain technology with IoT to how to design a
blockchain-based IoT system for solving the trust issues among
agri-food value chain members, which facilitate to build a
distributed peer-to-peer systems to interact with agri-food
value chain participants in a trust and auditable manner.


The trends towards stricter rules on food safety and food
quality leads some researchers to explore potential applications
of blockchain technology in other fields of agri-food value chain
management, such as how to apply blockchain technology in food


manufacturing [43] and how to use blockchain technology to
increase the water sustainability [59].


Regarding the performance of applying blockchain technology
in the agri-food value chain management, just a few papers
measure the performance from the perspective of reducing
tracking time to improve the traceability [4] and increasing the
efficiency of the traceability in the agri-food value chain [13].
Simultaneously, several literature review papers investigated how
blockchain technology has been applied in different industries
such as agri-food industry, financial service and healthcare [8,16].
They provide insights on the development of blockchain technol-
ogy in different industries and facilitate researchers to investigate
how to transfer the knowledge from theory to practice.


3.5. Thematic analysis


Braun and Clarke [51] stated that “thematic analysis is a method
for identifying, analysing and reporting patterns (themes) within
data, which provides core skills that will be useful for conducting
many other forms of qualitative analysis”. Holloway and Todres
[52] underlined that thematic analysis can be seen as a founda-
tional approach for qualitative analysis. In this paper, thematic
analysis was used to allow blockchain themes being generated by
six phases of analysis: reading the whole paper collected from SLR,
generating initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes,
defining and naming themes, and finally presenting the results.


Following the process of thematic analysis, we divided the
literature of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain
management based on the following themes: (1) current applica-
tions of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain manage-
ment; (2) the challenges for applying the blockchain technology in
agri-food value chain management. The detailed results from
thematic analysis are presented in Section 4. Tama et al. [16]


Table 3
Detailed information of each cluster.


Colour of
each cluster


Representative papers Main applications discussed


Orange
cluster


1. Where is current research on blockchain technology? – A systematic
review [17];
2. Blockchain in logistics and supply chain: trick or treat? [44];
3. A review on the use of Blocckahin for the Internet of Things [26];
4. Blockchain implementation quality challenges: A literature review [25];


Generally analyse the current applications of blockchain technology in
the value chain management


Black
cluster


1. Blockchain and smart contracts for the internet of things [41];
2. Blockchain with Internet of Things: benefits, challenges and future
directions [29];
3. Blockchain-based distributed cloud/fog platform for IoT supply chain
management [30];


Discussed the applications of blockchain technology integrated with
IoT: benefits, challenges and future research directions


Light green
cluster


1. An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID &
blockchain technology [38];
2. Use of blockchain technology in agribusiness: transparency and monitoring in
agricultural trade [39];
3. A distributed ledger for supply chain physical distribution visibility [31];


Proposed different blockchain-based traceability models that could be
used in agri-food value chain management


Purple
cluster


1. The truth about blockchain [42];
2. The blockchain as a software connector [32];
3. The security and traceability of shared information in the process
transportation of dangerous good [33];


Red cluster 1. Untrusted business process monitoring and execution using blockchain [34];
2. Toward open manufacturing: A cross-enterprise knowledge and services
exchange framework based on blockchain and edge computing [35];
3. A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on HACCP, Blockchain
& Internet of Things [46];


Blockchain technology was empirically examined in the current
traceability system and agri-food manufacturing


Blue cluster 1. Blockchain ready manufacturing supply chain using distributed ledger [43];
2. Trade: A transparent, decentralized traceability system for the supply chain
[36];
3. Holistic tracking of products on the blockchain using NFC and verified users
[37];


Green
cluster


1. Overview of blockchain as the engine of the 4th industrial revolution [27];
2. Agricultural food supply chain powered by big data and blockchain [28];
3. Convergence of AI, IoT, Big Data and Blockchain: A review [45];


How blockchain technology along with other technologies such as AI,
IoT, Big Data revolutionize the current agri-food industry


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 87














conducted a literature review on the blockchain technology and its
current applications, where the majority of literature was concerned
with the blockchain technology theory building and conceptual
development. However, the findings in our studyshowthat the trend
has been gradually shifted from theory building trying to use
blockchain technology in practice. Although the number of studies
on how blockchain technology can be used in agri-food value chain
management is increasing, there are a limited number of studies on
how blockchain technology can be executed.


4. Current applications of blockchain technology in agri-food
value chain management


The first application of the blockchain technology was Bitcoin –
a peer-to-peer electronic cash system [53]. Then, blockchain
technology evolved towards smart contracts with the ability to
provide transparency and trust to the system [41]. A smart contract
is a kind of computer program that stores on the blockchain and
executes by all consensus nodes in the network. It can translate
contractual clauses into code and store them into the storage file,
and operate them automatically and independently in a prescribed
manner based on the data that was included in the triggering
transaction [54]. Through operating the smart contracts, the need
for trusted intermediaries between partners can be minimized and
the occurrence of malicious or accidental exceptions can be
reduced. Thus, blockchain technology has been generalized and
applied in different domains such as finance [55], smart city [56],
healthcare [57] and agri-food value chain [43]. However, as
reviewed by Yli-Huumo et al. [17], more than 80% of the academic
papers on blockchain technology focused on the Bitcoin system,


while less than 20% deal with other blockchain applications.
Although it is a relatively new technology, blockchain is rapidly
advancing and developing. Lucena et al. [58] stated that there was a
huge opportunity for blockchain applications to global trade.
Blockchain market is estimated to grow from 210.2 million USD to
2312.5 million USD in the period from 2016 to 2021 based on the
Global Opportunity Report [90]. Due to its potential increase in
the global market, it is expected that blockchain technology will
play a critical role in facilitating future industry development
and revolution. However, Poberezhna [59] argued that the key
challenge for blockchain was to be considered as a simply
disruptive technology, rather than as an innovative integrative
solution that could provide a value proposition across a number of
business process. In the following four sub-sections, we analyse
the literature of the applications of blockchain technology in agri-
food value chain management by classifying them in four
distinctive themes: traceability, information security, manufactur-
ing and sustainable water management.


4.1. Applying blockchain technology in agri-food value chain
traceability


According to Murki [60], different value chains need to embed
blockchain technology in the current traceability system to create
more agile value chains and closer customer relationship. Tse et al.
[11] hold a similar view that the application of blockchain
technology in the agri-food value chain may have been the
optimal choice to fulfil the requirements of supervision and
adaption of the fast-growing food market. More specifically, Kumar
and Mallick [61] construe that blockchain technology has wider


Table 4
Most frequently cited articles in the citation network.


Rank Title Author (s) and years
of publication


Source Paper type LCS GCS


1 An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China
based on RFID & blockchain technology


Tian [38] 13th International Conference on Service
Systems and Service Management


Conference
paper


16 60


2 Blockchain and smart contract for the Internet of Things Christidis and
Devetsikiotis [41]


IEEE Access Journal
paper


12 350


3 Where is current research on blockchain technology? – A
systematic review


Yli-Huumo et al. [17] PloS One Journal
paper


8 157


4 The truth about blockchain Iansiti and Lakhani
[42]


Harvard Business Review Journal
paper


6 162


5 The blockchain as a software connector Xu et al. [32] 13th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software
Architecture


Conference
paper


6 70


6 Blockchain ready manufacturing supply chain using
distributed ledger


Abeyratne and
Monfared [43]


International Journal of Research in Engineering
and Technology


Journal
paper


5 38


7 Blockchain in logistics and supply chain: trick or treat? Hackius and Petersen
[44]


International Conference of Logistics Conference
paper


5 8


8 Toward open manufacturing: A cross-enterprise knowledge
and service exchange framework based on a blockchain and
edge computing


Li et al. [35] Industrial Management & Data Systems Journal
paper


5 4


9 Blockchain technology: beyond Bitcoin Crosby et al. [8] Applied Innovation Review Journal
paper


5 134


10 Trade: A transparent, decentralized traceability system for
the supply chain


Maouchi et al. [36] Proceedings of the 1 st ERCIM Blockchain
Workshop 2018


Conference
paper


4 2


11 A critical review of blockchain and its current applications Tama et al. [16] 2017 International Conference on Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science


Conference
paper


4 2


12 Untrusted business process monitoring and execution using
blockchain


Weber et al. [34] Business Process Management Book
chapter


3 74


13 Convergence of AI, IoT, Big Data and Blockchain: A review Rabah [45] The Lake Institute Journal Journal
paper


3 0


14 A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on
HACCP, Blockchain & Internet of Things


Tian [46] 14th International Conference on Service
Systems and Service Management


Conference
paper


3 9


15 Digital supply chain transformation toward blockchain
integration


Korpela et al. [47] Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences


Conference
paper


3 44


16 A survey on the security of blockchain systems Li et al. [48] Future Generation Computer Systems Journal
paper


3 25


Notes: LCS = Local citation score shows the count of citations to a paper within the collection; GCS = Global citation score shows the total number of citations to a paper in the
Web of Science.


88 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99










applications in agri-food value chain such as food delivery and
shipping data records, food online ordering and transaction data,
and food quality assurance data. To integrate blockchain technol-
ogy in the existing traceability system of agri-food value chain,
many researchers have tried to explore the options from different
perspectives. Tian [38] proposed an agri-food value chain
traceability system based on RFID (Radio-Frequency IDentifica-
tion) and blockchain technology for helping Chinese agri-food
markets to enhance their food safety and food quality during the
logistics process. In their proposed traceability system, RFID was
used for acquiring and sharing data in the agri-food value chain,
meanwhile, blockchain technology was used for guaranteeing the
data shared and published in this traceability system is reliable and
authentic. However, some researchers argue that RFID technology
and blockchain based traceability system has some defects in
solving the counterfeit issues. For example, RFID tags can be cloned
which can cause counterfeit parts to be circulated in the agri-food
value chain [62]. To overcome the drawbacks of RFID, Boehm et al.
[37] proposed an updated traceability system using blockchain
technology combined with Near Field Communication (NFC) and
verified users. In their proposed traceability system, users must
provide valid user credentials if they want to update a product’s
history on the blockchain. Thus, various changes of an agri-food
product can be reported, and the capabilities of other members can
be restricted at the same time. Therefore, holistic tracking agri-
food products with higher transparency and security can be
achieved. Faye [39] underlined that the application of blockchain
technology in agri-food industry would foster more transparency
and thus customers’ confidence towards agri-food products would
be re-established. Although blockchain technology has great
potential for revolutionizing current agri-food value chain
traceability systems, it still has some inherent defects such as
scalability that needs to be tackled, especially when we face mass
data in the real world. Recent innovations in blockchain, such as
scaling would change this working manner that requires every
computer in the blockchain to process every transaction [63].
Croman et al. [64] argued that a scaled blockchain could accelerate
the transaction process, without sacrificing high security, by
determining the optimal number of computers to validate each
transaction and divide work efficiently. Therefore, Tian [46]
investigated a value chain traceability system based on HACCP
(Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point), blockchain technology
and IoT. In their proposed new decentralized traceability system,
HACCP was used to prevent food risk occurrences, and IoT
combined with blockchain technology was used to continuously
deliver massive real-time food-related information to all value
chain partners in an effective, safe and efficient manner. Then, a
case testing experiment was used to check whether the system was
feasible or not. The research results indicate that food safety, value
chain efficiency and transparency have been effectively improved.
Badzar [65] emphasizes that openness and unchangeable attrib-
utes of blockchain ensure high transparency, stability and
reliability of agri-food value chain, as well as provide liquidity,
more accurate record-keeping and high transparency of ownership
[66]. To have deep understanding of knowledge on how blockchain
technology can be used to enhance agri-food business, Rabah [28]
conducted a review on the applications of big data and blockchain
technology in the agri-food industry. Their research results reveal
that blockchain technology played a critical role in creating secure
and transparent ledger that was available to all the involved
participants within the agri-food value chain including the
producers, manufacturers, logistics service providers, wholesalers,
retailers and regulators. They provide insights into the effects of
blockchain technology on the current traceability system, and
facilitate the development of blockchain technology in the agri-
food value chain management. Finally, Biswas et al. [67] propose a


blockchain based wine value chain traceability system where every
transaction is recorded as a block in the chain and is visible to
relevant value chain members such as the grape grower, wine
producer, bulk distributor, transit cellar, filler/packer, finished
goods distributor, wholesaler and retailer entity. One of the most
important features of their proposed system is that anyone can
trace the purchase history of the wine by inputting the product ID
in the system. However, their work just examines an example,
rather than a practical application of blockchain technology in the
wine value chain. Maouchi et al. [36] argue that although various
approaches have been proposed to create a decentralized
traceability system for agri-food value chain, these works do not
state the feasibility of their work and their application for the agri-
food value chain.


Due to the great potential benefits of applying blockchain
technology to agri-food value chain traceability system, several
agricultural industry enterprises around the world have evaluated
the effect of blockchain technology. For example, Walmart plans to
invest $25 million over five years from 2017 to establish one food
safety collaboration centre in Beijing to build a completely new
food traceability system with blockchain technology. Their mango
blockchain solution pilots reduced the time for tracking mango
origins from seven days to 2.2 s, thus, more transparency and
greater efficiency have been achieved in Walmart’s food value
chain. Then, a pork value chain traceability system combined with
barcode has been built based on the mango blockchain solutions
[13]. Yiannas [68] states that the biggest advantage of this system
is that it allows any trusted users to verify the traceability and
authenticity of the product at any point of the pork value chain.
Despite the increasing emphasis on applying blockchain technol-
ogy in agri-food value chain traceability system, recent studies
conducted by Kshetri [69] show that just a few researchers have
begun to systematically assess the effects of blockchain technology
on current agri-food value chain traceability system. Caro et al. [4]
introduced an AgriBlockIoT traceability system for agri-food value
chain management. It was constituted with three main compo-
nents, a REST Application Interface with the responsibilities to
integrate with the existing software system, a controller equipped
with the abilities to query and convert the data records stored in
the blockchain, and blockchain involved with smart contracts as a
gateway to the blockchain itself. It is important to note that smart
contracts can fire autonomously; hence creating records whenever
anomalies are detected. Then, two different implementations,
namely Ethereum and Hyperledger Sawtooth were used to do the
performance analysis of traceability. Their research results indicate
that Hyperledger Sawtooth has better performances than the
Ethereum counterpart and may be more suitable for IoT devices,
because Etherum is quite CPU-intensive. Based on the case study
for grain quality assurance tracking, Lucena [58] finds out that
quality measurement throughout the transportation for grains
along the value chain is always accompanied with fraud, poor
monitoring and delay to final destinations. Their findings indicate
that using blockchain technology in the grain value chain
traceability system is the best way at present to reduce disputes
among business partners and information asymmetries. Finally,
Kumar and Iyengar [70] demonstrated a blockchain based
traceability framework for rice value chain management. In their
proposed framework, blockchain was used to record all related
issues happening within the rice value chain and monitor the
security and quality of rice in the transportation process. It is
important to note that all members in the rice value chain
should register themselves and match their unique identities
and digital profiles in the blockchain system. The research result
indicates that the security of rice in the transportation process
and the efficiency of the rice value chain have been greatly
improved.


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 89






4.2. Applying blockchain technology in the agri-food value chain
information security


Under the background of Industry 4.0 and distributed
computing, the characteristics of information system in agri-food
industry have experienced substantial changes. Blockchain tech-
nology has inherent benefits such as recording transactions in real-
time, no intermediary, immutability and distributed ledger, which
becomes the first choice for agri-food value chain managers to
enhance information security [60]. Tse et al. [11] construed that
blockchain was a well worthy technology for helping agri-food
value chain participants to record and transfer transactions
authentically. Leng et al. [1] proposed a public blockchain for
agricultural value chain system along with double-chain architec-
ture. The research results reveal that the proposed agricultural
business resource blockchain not only can increase the security of
transaction information and privacy of enterprise information, but
also can enhance the credibility of the public service platform and
facilitate overall increase of efficiency across the whole value chain
system. Neisse et al. [71] explored a blockchain-based approach to
achieve data accountability and provenance tracking. Their
findings indicate that for the dynamic data frequently shared
among value chain members such as the transaction record in agri-
food value chain, which have strict scalability and performance
requirements, controllers or processors should manage a contract
that registers all subjects accepting all or part of usage conditions.


Recently, with the advancement of IoT, machine-to-machine
(M2M) connections is estimated to increase to 3.9 billion to 2022
[72]. More and more agri-food value chain participants are being
equipped with interconnected electronic devices and protocol
suites to increase the connectivity and sophisticated data
gathering and analytics capabilities [50]. However, most of the
IoT solutions are dependent on the centralized server-client
paradigm, connecting to the cloud servers through the Internet
[26]. Decentralised architectures such as building a large Peer-to-
Peer (P2P) Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) may cause privacy and
security issues to the users [73]. Thus, effective tools to ensure
information security need to be supported by agri-food value chain
participants to meet the requested security requirements.
Currently, around 50% of agri-food practitioners have been
experimenting blockchain technology with creating proof-of-
concept, and 17% of agri-food practitioners have been preparing
to deploy and use it in their business [74]. Hammi et al. [49]
proposed a public blockchain-based approach in which devices can
communicate with each other in a completely secure and efficient
way by creating a secure virtual zone. After a series of tests, the
research results indicate that the blockchain-based system
demonstrated high resilience towards attacks. Iansiti and Lakhani
[42] underlined that blockchain technology could provide secure,
irreversible, distributed, transparent and accurate information
sharing service. After conducting research on blockchain-
based distributed cloud/fog platform for IoT, Davcev et al. [30]
proposed that holistically using these blockchain-based ICT
technologies has a positive effect in increasing the quality of
agri-food products.


4.3. Applying blockchain technology in agri-food manufacturing


In today’s highly competitive and knowledge-based economy,
managing massive amount of information and services is the basic
requirement for successful food manufacturers. As the information
and services are diversified, growing in an accelerating velocity,
and highly complex, an increase number of food manufacturers
have difficulties in acquiring and managing them alone. Wang et al.
[75] state that it is necessary for food manufacturers to work
together and sustain their competitiveness. To address this issue,


some researchers have started integrating blockchain concept into
manufacturing practices. Li et al. [35] proposed a decentralized
framework to manage the knowledge and services shared between
different enterprises based on the blockchain application involved
smart contracts and edge computing. In their proposed framework,
edge computing acted as a foundation for providing distributed
network, storage and computing capabilities in the manufacturing
environment. The smart contracts played as interfaces between
enterprise and its partners for successfully interact. Thus, a signed
secure and controllable connection between the enterprise and the
partner could be built with the transaction record and the status
were updated on the blockchain. A case study was used to examine
the effectiveness of the decentralized framework. The case study
results indicate that manufacturers can develop scalable and
flexible businesses at a lower cost, and ultimately the overall
quality, efficiency, and effectiveness of manufacturing services can
be improved. Furthermore, Zhao et al. [76], built a model of
manufacturing service information based on blockchain principle
and cloud computing, which theoretically solves the problems of
sharing and securing the manufacturing resources, recalling the
product data and guaranteeing the quality of the processing.
Finally, Kumar and Mallic [61] reported that blockchain technology
could be used in various perspectives of manufacturing, such as
manufacturing management, production data, product warranty
information and product assurance. Although blockchain technol-
ogy has been seen as a critical element in the manufacturing sector
in recent years, the role of blockchain technology for promoting
resilience, scalability, security and autonomy of manufacturing
service has been relatively overlooked [14].


4.4. Applying blockchain technology in sustainable water
management


The agriculture productivity is highly dependent on water
resource management. How to use water resources effectively and
efficiently is crucial for agriculture development. To drive the
sustainable development of water, it is critical to address water
scarcity aspects that are deeply interrelated with agri-food
development. Therefore, Civic Ledger [77] considered to develop a
blockchain-enabled peer-to-peer trading platform (Water Ledger)
that would allow more irrigators to participate in the platform that
entitles and allocates water securely and transparently, further
boosting the overall efficiency of water resources. Though creating
new digital identity for irrigators and digitizing the water assets in
agri-foodvalue chainwill cost a lotof money, Poberezhna [59] argues
that blockchain combined with smart contracts can potentially help
water companies and government bodies to access real-time data
regarding market shares, consumption patterns and management of
utility bills of consumers, thus, greater transparency to regulators
and auditors can be achieved. Their research also indicates that
recordkeeping will be significantly reduced when the blockchain
platform is applied in water trading.


5. The challenges for applying blockchain technology in
agri-food value chain


Blockchain technology is still in testing phase and its
implementation in agri-food value chain management has some
issues that need to be tackled. Therefore, in this section, we will
scrutinize the challenges to apply blockchain technology in
agri-food value chain management. A review of the literature
indicates that there are six main challenges for applying block-
chain technology in agri-food value chain management: storage
capacity and scalability issue, privacy leakage, regulation
problem, high cost problem, throughput and latency issue, and
lack of skills.


90 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99






5.1. Storage capacity and scalability


Storage capacity along with scalability issues have been deeply
questioned in the blockchain. Koteska et al. [25] stated that one of
the main challenges for blockchain implementation is scalability.
To provide theoretically proven security, it is necessary to have a
large number of full nodes (a node that can fully validate
transactions and blocks) in the blockchain implementation. The
nodes in the blockchain network are expected to validate each
transaction of each block [50]. Otherwise, blockchain implemen-
tation in agri-food value chain management might result in a less
decentralized system. Koteska et al. [25] proposed that scalability
negatively affected three dimensions of the blockchain, the size of
the data on the blockchain, the transaction processing rate and the
latency of data transmission on the blockchain.


Although only full nodes store the full chain, storage require-
ments are also significant [50]. For example of the Bitcoin, the
blockchain is always growing with a rate of 1MB per block every
ten minutes and store a large amount of data in every node that no
interest for them [26]. As the number of transactions increase in
the agri-food value chains, the amount of data becomes larger, and
the loading of store and computing accompanied with data
becomes harder, which results in the blockchain becoming bulky
[78]. Simultaneously, every participant in the agri-food value chain
needs to constantly store all transaction data to validate them on
the blockchain because they need to check if the source of the
current transaction is unspent or not [83]. Thus, with the node size
increasing, additional resources are required by the nodes. Finally
the system’s capacity scale is reduced and synchronization time for
the new user is increased [50].


5.2. Privacy leakage


In the blockchain, each transaction can be traced, checked and
audited and every user can be identified by their public key or its
hash. Undoubtedly, blockchain technology provides a new level of
transparency and helps to build trust. However, it also has negative
effect on protecting users’ privacy [50]. Kosba et al. [79] stated that
blockchain could not guarantee the transactional privacy even with
the permission management because the information on block-
chain was available to all participants who belonged to the
blockchain network. Lu and Xu [80] underlined that every member
could access all information on the blockchain because there were
no privileged users. Maouchi et al. [36] argued that some agri-food
value chain members might be competitors with each other and
they did not enjoy the transparent traceability system. Therefore,
many efforts for protecting privacy in blockchain has been done
such as obfuscation on the transaction relationships to prevent
linking or tracing analysis, hiding the identifies of the sender and
the receiver through complicated cryptographic schemes, and
blinding the transaction content whilst retaining the verifiability
and computability [81]. In order to ensure transactions are not
easily to be traced to any given person or computer, Monero [82]
applies ring of signatures scheme to guarantee transactions
untraceable. Other schemes such as Stealth Addresses, Pedersen
Commitments, Ring Signature, Homomorphic Encryption, Zero-
knowledge-proof have been used in blockchains to improve
privacy, but no schemes can hide the sender, the receiver and
the amount at the same time [40]. Kosba et al. [79] tackled these
privacy issues differently through using encrypted transactions.
The Hawk – a decentralized smart contract is responsible for
translating the generic code written by programmers into
cryptographic primitives such as zero-knowledge proofs that
retaining transactional privacy. After researching in the wine value
chain traceability system, Biswas et al. [67] stated that there were
two drawbacks of the blockchain technology: one is the


transaction speed; the other one is privacy as neither companies
nor individuals would like to publish all information onto a public
database.


5.3. High cost problem


Lin and Liao [83] proposed that agri-food value chain
participants would need a lot of money and time to embed
blockchain technology in the current agri-food value chain
traceability system. Yli-Huumo et al. [17] noted that when
blockchain became more complex, the computational power
would be another critical issue, as it required more computational
power to confirm more blocks. Simultaneously, energy consump-
tion also needs to be taken into consideration [39]. After
conducting a case study on blockchain-based traceability system,
Lu and Xu [80] pointed out some public blockchains inherent with
a proof-of-work consensus mechanism wasted a lot of electricity.
Most of the electricity is consumed in two different ways: (1) a
large amount of electricity is used for the mining process, which
involves a consensus algorithm that consists in a sort of brute force
search for a hash; (2) another amount of electricity is consumed in
peer-to-peer communications because it requires an edge device to
be powered [26].


5.4. Regulation problem


Agri-food value chains are extended across the globe. Hence,
applying blockchain technology in agri-food value chain manage-
ment needs to be considered from a global perspective. However,
blockchain is a new technology that involves different people from
various countries without any legal or regulation to follow.
Additionally, the absence of a central authority and the non-
existent of censorship in the current blockchain system, this
situation creates many uncertainties [50]. Atlam et al. [29] stated
that this was a serious problem for both agri-food manufacturers
and service providers. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce new
laws or regulations to monitor and regulate blockchain applica-
tions in the agri-food industry for compliance [8]. After conducting
a case study on grain quality assurance tracking-based on
blockchain technology, Lucena et al. [58] found a controversial
issue when using blockchain technology regarding its legal value.
Their research also indicates that complex agri-food value chain
scenarios involving international trade and arbitration laws are yet
to be proven.


5.5. Throughput and latency issue


In the context of agri-food value chain management, due to the
original restriction of block size and the time interval used to
generate a new block, the current processing capacity of blokchain
cannot fulfil the requirements of processing millions of trans-
actions in real-time. Aste et al. [84] (p.26) stated that “a system that
could handle large transaction volumes would require large blocks
or mechanisms in which multiple blocks are validated simulta-
neously”. All the above issues will cause a big problem for clients
when running a blockchain-based system. After investigating an
RFID and blockchain based traceability system for agri-food value
chain, Tian [38] stated that there were two obstacles for applying
blockchain technology: (1) the transaction capacity of blockchain
is restricted to seven transactions per second due to the restricted
size of block; (2) how to deal with storage and synchronization
issues with the growing size of the blockchain.


Regarding latency, it is critical to note that current blockchain
system needs some time to process transactions. For example, in
the case of Bitcoin, block creation times follow a Poisson
distribution with an average of ten minutes (10-minute block


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 91






interval with 6-block confirmation) [26]. As for Ethereum, it is
estimated around 3 min for 14-second block interval with 12-block
confirmation [85]. Jindal et al. [86] construed that the time
required for generating blocks and validating transactions is
increases with an increase in the number of transactions. Sharma
et al. [87] evaluated the performance of a blockchain-based
distributed framework involved with Proof-of-Work algorithm and
found that additional cost in computing sources and more
processing time is required in case of network delays.


5.6. Lack of skills


Given that blockchain is a new technology, a limited number of
people have in-depth knowledge and skills about how blockchain
can be used in agri-food value chain management [29]. To obtain
general knowhow in blockchain technology and expectations of the
technology in the context of agri-food value chain, Ge et al. [10]
conducted numerous interviews and meetings with agri-food value
chain stakeholders. They found that a considerable level of
scepticism existed among stakeholders with low know-how of
blockchain technology, partly due to the way blockchain was
portrayed as panacea to all information problems, partly due to a
series of technical issues that remained to be resolved. Therefore,
Iansiti and Lakhani [42] proposed that applying blockchain
technology in the agri-food value chain was likely to be a long
process. Simultaneously, awidespread lack of understanding on how
blockchain works in other areas also exists [88].


6. Discussion: research gaps and future research directions


Below, we summarized the research gaps and future research
directions on blockchain technology in agri-food value chain
management based on our systematic review of the literature.


6.1. Future research directions for the applications of blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain management


The analysis of the applications of blockchain technology in
agri-food value chain management allows us to better understand
how blockchain technology has been applied and evolved in agri-
food value chain management. Several directions for future
research about implementing blockchain technology in agri-food
value chain management are suggested and summarized in the
following.


! In the context of applying blockchain technology in agri-food
value chain traceability, various researchers proposed different
blockchain-based traceability system that involved different
technologies such as RFID, IoT, NFC, cloud computing, and big
data, as well took different agri-food value chain entities into
consideration (see Table 5). It is interesting to note that the
traceability system proposed by Davcev et al. [30] could provide a
comprehensive function for monitoring the land status, vegetable
status, as well as to help to achieve the transparent and secure
agri-food value chain. Therefore, should be implemented in
reality. However, most of the proposed traceability systems are
staying inconceptualphaseand there is little empirical researchto
suggest which one is most applicable to the reality. Additionally,
just few researchers considered third-party regulators/authority
organizations in their proposed traceability framework. There-
fore, one of the priorities for researching the blockchain-based
traceability system is to conduct empirical research involving
third-party regulators/authority organizations on different con-
text of agri-food value chains to assess the performance of the
blockchain-based traceability system. Thus, future studies can
evaluate the proposed blockchain-based traceability framework


effects from different perspectives, such as computation costs,
transaction processing speed, storage capability, and the overall
efficiency of agri-food value chains.


! There are two main areas in the literature for using blockchain
technology to improve agri-food value chain information
security: one is using blockchain technology alone; the other
one is using blockchain technology combined with other
technologies such as IoT (see Table 6). Obviously, double
blockchain architecture has it unique advantages such as
efficiency, transparency and privacy can be achieved with
more data can be stored in the blockchain. Key technical
components such as decentralized storage, mining hardware,
and consensus mechanisms are easily to be achieved. However,
it needs more effective consensus mechanism to deal with
large amount of nodes and resources that stored in public
service platform. Therefore, future research should investigate
which consensus algorithm is more effective compared with
others (Proof-of-Work, Proof-of-Stake, etc) in the same context.
IoT applications have its own drawbacks such as they generate
large volume of data and require connectivity and power for
long periods. Besides, there are other limitations in memory,
computer capacity, networks and limited power supply. In
order to alleviate above issues, one important future research
direction is to decide where the interactions will take place
when combining blockchain technology with IoT, for example,
inside the IoT, or blockchain, or a hybrid approach involving
blockahin and IoT. It will need to discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of these blockchain-IoT based applications
through comparative analysis. This area is open for future
researchers to investigate the impact and relative importance,
and identify which one is the optimal choice to enhance agri-
food information security.


! Another finding of this study is a new trend of focusing on
blockchain technology to achieve a higher level of sharing
knowledge and services among agri-food manufacturers.
Current agri-food manufacturing ecosystem is changing from
integrated and centralized systems to shared and distributed
systems. Most of the proposed framework for achieving higher
performance were based on the blockchain technology and
cloud computing, which aimed to provide a secure, low energy
consumption and high efficiency systems to agri-food manu-
facturers. However, it still has some drawbacks. For example,
unstable data transmission, lack of uniformed technology
standard and low internet speed, etc. Blockchain technology
integrated with edge computing provide a new way to achieve a
higher level knowledge sharing performance through develop-
ing a distributed, sharing, standardized, and secured framework.
Key technological components such as communication protocol,
decentralized storage, smart contracts, edge cloud are all needed
to build this system. However, there are questions remaining
about the combination of blockchain and edge computing in
enhancing overall efficiency and effectiveness of agri-food
manufacturers. Thus, future studies should apply the blokchain
technology and edge computing in different agri-food manu-
facturers using empirical and analytical tools to assess its effect
on agri-food manufacturing.


! A new trend emerging in the literature is the application of
blockchain technology in sustainable water management. A few
studies discussed how to apply blockchain technology to
enhance water sustainability. However, these studies just
considered how to enhance water sustainability from irrigator’s
perspective and water company’s perspective, rather than
taking the whole agri-food value chain stakeholders into
consideration. Therefore, future work should holistically con-
sider how to use blockchain technology to enhance water
sustainability from the whole agri-food value chain perspective.


92 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99






























Table 5
Blockchain technology used for agri-food value chain traceability.


Paper Authors Involved technologies Involved entities Advantages Disadvantages


An agri-food supply chain
traceability system for
China based on RFID &
Blockchain technology


Tian [38] RFID & Blockchain
technology


Plant, farm, warehouse centre,
transport vehicle, sales market,
and government departments
& third-party regulators


(1) Benefit to tracking and
traceability management;
(2) Benefit to enhance the
credibility of the agri-food
safety information;
(3) Benefit to fighting against
fake products.


(1) High cost for using
RFID;
(2) Transaction capacity
and storage capacity of
blockchain technology


A supply chain
traceability system for
food safety based on
HACCP, Blockchain &
Internet of Things


Tian [46] IoT & Blockchain
technology with
distributed databases


Farmer/Producer, processor,
wholesaler, retailer, authority
organizations


(1) Can deliver real-time
information to all supply chain
members;
(2) Improve the efficiency and
transparency of the food supply
chain;
(3) Extremely reduce the risk of
centralized information
systems.


(1) High cost for using
RFID.


Blockchain based wine
supply chain
traceability system


Biswas et al. [67] RFID & Blockchain
technology


Supplier, grape grower, wine
producer, filler/packer, freight
operator, finished goods
distributor, wholesaler, retailer,
and consumer


(1) The proposed traceability
system enables transparency,
accountability, safety, and
security in the overall process
from the grape to the bottle.


(1) Low transaction
speed;
(2) Privacy issues;
(3) Current system only
provides limited
command-line based
instructions to store
information;
(4) Can only deal with
public data.


Holistic tracking of
products on the
blockchain using NFC
and verified users


Boehm et al. [37] NFC & Blockchain
technology


Carrier, authority, service
provider, and consumer


(1) Do not need to share a
private key to sign a
transaction, assures
confidentially of personal
information.


(1) The effectiveness the
system relies on the
correctness of the
updates that people
perform;
(2) Additional overhead
and costs.


Blockchain-based
traceability in agri-food
supply chain
management: A
practical
implementation


Caro et al. [4] IoT sensor devices &
Blockchain technology


Provider of raw materials,
producer, processor,
distributor, retailer, and
consumer


(1) Creating transparent, fault-
tolerance, immutable and
auditable records for the
traceability system.


(1) Quite CPU-intensive;
(2) Can only be using one
language when
implementing logic.


Blockchain based
distributed cloud fog
platform for IoT supply
chain management


Davcev et al. [30] IoT, Cloud computing,
RFID, Big data &
Blockchain technology


Farm, processor, transport and
packaging, wholesaler, retailer,
and consumer


(1) Transparent and secure
supply chain system can be
achieved;
(2) Real-time information on
the air temperature, air
humidity and leaf wetness and
soil moisture;
(3) Lower power consumption.


(1) High cost for applying
these technologies
together.
(2) Requiring the devices
to be powered
continuously, which
could lead to waste
energy.


A case study for grain
quality assurance
tracking based on a
blockchain business
network


Lucena et al. [58] IoT & Blockchain smart
contracts


Farmer, rural credit bank,
private warehouse agent,
trading company agent, food
processing company


(1) All the members in the agri-
food supply chain can share the
same business rules and
transaction data, transaction
transparency were improved.


(1) May have regulation
problem if involved in
the international trade.


Table 6
Blockchain technology used for agri-food value chain information security.


Authors Involved
technologies


Architecture Advantages Disadvantages


Leng et al.
[1]


Blockchain Double chain architecture based
on public service platform


(1) Improve the transparency and security of transaction
information;
(2) Protect the privacy of enterprise information;
(3) Increase the efficiency of the system.


(1) Slowly speed and efficiency of consensus
algorithm


Neisse
et al. [71]


Sole chain architecture based on
public service platform


(1) Data privacy can be achieved;
(2) Immutable.


(1) Scalability issues
(2) High cost


Reyna et al.
[50]
Hammi
et al. [49]


Blockchain-
IoT


IoT-IoT (1) Fast latency;
(2) Security when work offline;
(3) IoT devices can communicate with each other;
(4) Part of data can stored in blockchain


(1) Low security when working online


IoT-Blockchain (1) Immutable record of interactions; (2) Increase the
autonomy of IoT devices;
(3) All the interactions can be traced


(1) Data were stored in blockchain,
bandwidth and data would be increased


Hybrid approach (1) Part of the data are stored in the blockchain, and the
rest are direct shared with other partners


(1) High cost because involved more devices


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 93






6.2. Future research directions for addressing the challenges of
applying blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management


From our systematic literature review, six key challenges
emerged for applying blockchain technology in agri-food value
chain management, they are storage capacity and scalability,
privacy leakage, high cost problem, regulation problem, through-
put and latency issue, and lack of skills. Although a growing body of
literature is available on discussing these challenges, a number of
challenges still exist. The purpose of this section is to highlight the
main challenges identified in the literature and propose future
research directions for unsolved problems. The identified solutions
for the challenges of blockchain technology in agri-food value
chain management are summarized in Table 7.


! One of key challenges for applying blockchain technology in agri-
food value chain is the storage capacity. Although some researchers
broadly investigated several methods that could enhance the
storage capacity, for example, store part of the data on-chain and
part of the data off-chain [85], build a multi-layers blockchain
architecture with different purposes [40], and develop a new
algorithm involved deep learning concept [12] (see Table 7). It is
easily to find that more computational power is required when
implementing these solution methods. Therefore, future work
should investigate how to appropriate solve the data storage
problem without increasing the computational power. Specifically,
integrating the deep learning concept or artificially intelligence
concept with current algorithms such as ant colony algorithm to
achieve computational power efficiency and systematically


Table 7
The identified solutions for the challenges of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management.


Main
challenges


Possible solutions Advantages Disadvantages Future research directions


Storage
capacity
and
scalability


To store raw data off-chain, and to store
meta-data, small critical data, and hashes
of the raw data only on-chain [85]


1. Cost efficiency, better
performance and improved
flexibility.


1. More computation power is
required;
2. How to integrate the on-
chain data and off-chain data
is a problem.


1. Comparative analysis of different data
storage methods empirically;
2. Integrating deep learning concept or
artificial intelligence concept with current
algorithms.


Removing old transactions, fragmenting
the global ledger into smaller sub-ledgers
and using a hierarchy of blockchains [40]


1. Reducing the cost because the
data are stored in different layer
of blockchain;
2. Improved the security of the
system.


1. Transaction and validation
speed will be influenced with
more data are stored in the
blockchain.
2. More computation power
is required.


Novel approach Takagi-Sugeno Fuzzy
cognitive maps ANN [12]


1. Eliminate of irrelevance data
within mining process.


1. More computation power is
required;
2. High cost problem.


Privacy
leakage


Double Chain architecture [1] 1. Can guarantee the
authenticity, integrity, and non-
tampering of transaction data,
and ensure the privacy of user
information.
2. Improve the throughput rate
and consensus speed of the
system;
3. Business extension can be
implemented.


1. The consensus of public
blockchain is low.


1. Conduct more empirical studies on the
performance of the agri-food value chain
with double chain architecture;
2. Conduct experiments to check how to
combine these data privacy schemes to
maximum the performance.


Stealth Addresses, Pedersen
Commitments, Ring signature,
Homomorphic encryption, Zero-
Knowledge-Proof [40];


1. Desired level of privacy can be
achieved through implementing
mixed techniques.


1. No scheme can hide the
sender, the receiver and the
amount at the same time;
2. More computation time is
required.


High cost
problem


Perform Proof-of-Stake algorithm [80] 1. Only require a small amount
of computing time and the
ability to ensure the normal
operation of the blockchain;
2. Latency is shorter.


1. The consensus speed is
low;
2. Node is accumulated even
when the node is not
connected to the network in
the stake stage.


1. Conduct comparative analysis of these
two algorithms using empirical study in
the context of agri-food value chain.


Perform delegated Proof-of-Stake
algorithm [78]


1. Less nodes involved in block
validation;
2. Block size and intervals can be
adjusted by delegates.


1. Transactions are performed
faster;
2. Dishonest delegates can
cause financial loss.


Regulation
problem


1. Design and implementation of a clear
regulatory framework for blockchain
implementation in the agri-food domain
and develop the evidence for the added
value of the blockchain technology [10];
2. Government should set up blockchain
infrastructure to support policy
formulation [26].


1. Accelerate the process of
formulating policies and
regulations related to the
blockchain implementation.
2. Make blockchain technology
is easily accepted by agri-food
value chain participants.


1. Government need to invest
a lot of money and human
resources, and may not get
the suitable results.


1. Investigate the effects of blockchain
technology on agri-food value chain,
especially on the international agri-food
trade, and then formulate standards and
regulations.


Throughput
and
latency
issue


1. Implement Bitcoin-NG consensus
algorithm [89];
2. Increase the size of each block [17].


1. Improve the latency and
bandwidth without sacrificing
other properties such as
security;
2. More transactions speed per
second.


1. Bandwidth is limited by the
bandwidth of nodes and the
latency limited by the
propagation time of the
network.
2. More expensive for
managing larger blocks.


1. Holistically consider this problem to find
the optimal solution for integrating
Bitcoin-NG consensus algorithm and
appropriate size of each block.


Lack of skills Not addressed


94 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99






eliminate the irrelevance data of blockchain provide a new route for
solving the storage problem. Furthermore, comparative analysis of
implementing these possible solutions in the context of agri-food
value chain should be conducted empirically and analytically.


! Most of the researchers investigated how to solve privacy
leakage issues from single blockchain architecture perspective,
and have applied different schemes such as Stealth Addresses,
Pedersen Commitments, Ring signature, Homomorphic encryp-
tion, Zero-Knowledge-Proof to protect privacy of users. Few
researchers investigated how to protect privacy from a double
blockchain architecture perspective, that is, one for public, one
for agri-food value chain participants. Therefore, future work
should investigate how to design and evaluate double chain
structures for blockchain. Further, conduct experiments to check
how to combine the above-listed data privacy schemes to
maximum the performance of data privacy mechanisms.


! As for the high cost problem, different consensus algorithms have
been proposed by various authors such as Proof-of-Stake and
delegated Proof-of-Stake algorithm. Though these two algorithms
have various advantages such as reducing the computing time, less
nodes will be involved in the block validation, etc. However, no one
have conducted comparative analysis using these two algorithms
in empirical study in the context of agri-food value chain. This area
is open for future researchers to systematically investigate the
impact and relative importance of different mechanisms using
empirical and analytical tools.


! As discussed earlier, blockchain is a new technology which
neither has any legislations or regulations to follow, nor has a
defined way of how to insert the implications arising from
blockchain technology into a norm setting. Although the
application of blockchain technology in agri-food value chain
is currently still in its infancy, it can be expected that more
initiatives will be taken by various agri-food organizations [10].
Therefore, more work should be taken from theory and empirical
perspectives to check the effects of blockchain technology on the
agri-food value chain, especially to check its effect in the
international agri-food trade, and then formulate corresponding
standards based on the research results.


! As for the throughput and latency issue, some researchers
proposed different methods to solve this problem such as
implementing Bitcoin-NG algorithm and increase the size of each
block [17,89]. However, both of methods are not perfect enough
which will have side effects such as larger blocks make full nodes
more expensive to operate, and the latency is limited by the
propagation time of the network, etc. Therefore, how to choose


appropriate algorithm and block size without side effects become
very important in solving the throughput and latency issue of
blockchain. It is necessary to holistically consider this problem
with continually experiments and get an optimal solution.


! Finally, concerned with the lack of skills, we did not find many
publications that gave us clear answers on this challenge. Only Ge
et al. [10] proposed two learning objectives for solving the challenge
of lacking skills: (1) learn general knowledge of blockchain
technology; (2) identify how to benefit from blockchain technology.


7. Conclusions


In this study, we conducted an SLNA to review existing work on
blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management.
Through question formulation, locating studies, study selection
and evaluation, we identified 71 publications, including journal
papers, conference proceedings and book chapters. Then, we used
software Gephi to build a citation network based on the citation data
collected from Web of Science, which helped us to identify current
trends and future research directions of blockchain technology in
agri-food value chain management. The target publications of this
study covered a broad spectrum of themes such as blockchain-based
information security and traceability system, and blockchain-based
water sustainability and food manufacturing.


By synthesising the literature of blockchain technology in agri-
food value chain management within a 10-year timeframe (2008–
2018), this paper makes contributions to existing knowledge in
three aspects: (1) The paper provides an overall picture of the
evolution of blockchain technology and its application in agri-food
value chains. (2) The paper elicited key challenges and proposed
initial solutions for applying blockchain technology to agri-
food value chain. (3) Research gaps have been identified and
future research directions were suggested for applying blockchain
technology in agri-food value chain management. The findings
of this study provide a solid foundation for future studies in
the area of blockchain technology and agri-food value chain
management.


Acknowledgment


The work reported in this paper has benefited from the RUC-
APS project funded by European Commission under the Horizon
2020 Programme (H2020-MSCA-RISE Award No. 691249).


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 95






Appendix A.


Fig. A1. The process of systematic literature network analysis.


96 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99






References


[1] K. Leng, Y. Bi, L. Jing, H.-C. Fu, I.V. Nieuwenhuyse, Research on agricultural
supply chain system with double chain architecture based on blockchain
technology, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 86 (2018) 641–649.


[2] I.H. Boyaci, H.T. Temiz, R.S. Uysal, H.M. Velioglu, R.J. Yadegari, M.M. Rishkan, A
novel method for discrimination of beef and horsemeat using Raman
spectroscopy, Food Chem. 148 (2014) 37–41.


[3] J. Xiao, Z.Y. Liu, B.W. Li, Research on a food supply chain traceability
management system based on RFID, J. Agric. Mech. Res. 34 (2) (2012) 181–184.


[4] M.P. Caro, M.S. Ali, M. Vecchio, R. Giaffreda, IoT Vertical and Topical Summit on
Agriculture – Tuscany (IoT Tuscany). Tuscany, Italy, 8-9 May 2018, Blockchain-
Based Traceability in Agri-Food Supply Chain Management: A Practical
Implementation (2018) Rome: Italy.


[5] N. Bumbudsanpharoke, S. Ko, Nano-food packaging: an overview of
market, migration research, and safety regulations, J. Food Sci. 80 (5)
(2015) 910–923.


[6] J. Kirwan, D. Maye, G. Brunori, Acknowledging complexity in food supply
chains when assessing their performance and sustainability, J. Rural Stud. 52
(2017) 21–32.


[7] R.S. Mor, S. Singh, A. Bhardwaj, L.P. Singh, Technological implications of supply
chain practices in agri-food sector – a review, Int. J. Supply Oper. Manage. 2 (2)
(2015) 720–747.


[8] M. Crosby, Nachiappan, P. Pattanayak, S. Verma, V. Kalyanaraman, Blockchain
technology: beyond bitcoin, Appl. Innov. Rev. 2 (2016) 6–19.


[9] D. Drescher, Planning the blockchain: the basic concepts of managing ownership
with the blockchain, Blockchain Basics, Apress, Berkeley, 2017, pp. 57–62.


[10] L. Ge, C. Brewster, J. Spek, A. Smeenk, J. Top, Blockchain for Agriculture and
Food, Wageningen Economic Research, Netherland, 2017.


[11] D. Tse, B. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Cheng, H. Mu, IEEE International Conference on
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM). 10-13 December
2017Blockchain Application in Food Supply Information Security2017,
Blockchain Application in Food Supply Information Security (2017).


[12] R.-Y. Chen, A traceability chain algorithm for artificial neural networks using T-
S fuzzy cognitive maps in blockchain, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 80 (2018)
198–210.


[13] R. Kamath, Food traceability on blockchain: Walmart’s pork and mango pilots
with IBM, J. Br. Blockchain Assoc. 1 (1) (2018) 1–12.


[14] L. Xu, E. Xu, L. Li, Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends, Int. J. Prod. Res.
56 (8) (2018) 2941–2962.


[15] R. Anascavage, N. Davis, Blockchain Technology: a Literature Review Available
at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3173406 [Accessed:
3 July 2018], (2018) .


[16] B.A. Tama, B.J. Kweka, Y. Park, K.-H. Rhee, 2017 International Conference on
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Palembang, Indonesia, 22-23
August 2017A Critical Review of Blockchain and Its Current Applications2017,
A Critical Review of Blockchain and Its Current Applications (2017) Jakarta:
Indonesia.


[17] J. Yli-Huumo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, K. Smolander, Where is current research on
blockchain technology? - A systematic review, PLoS One 11 (10) (2016) 1–27.


[18] C. Colicchia, F. Strozzi, Supply chain risk management: a new methodology for
a systematic literature review, Supply Chain. Manag. Int. J. 17 (4) (2012) 403–
418.


[19] N.-O. Hohenstein, E. Feisel, E. Hartmann, Research on the phenomenon of
supply chain resilience: a systematic review and paths for further
investigation, Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 45 (1/2) (2015) 90–117.


[20] D. Denyer, T. Tranfield, The Sage Handbook of Organisational Research
Methods, Sage, London, 2009.


[21] D.M. Gligor, M.C. Holcomb, Understanding the role of logistics capabilities in
achieving supply chain agility: a systematic literature review, Supply Chain.
Manag. Int. J. 17 (4) (2012) 438–453.


[22] M. Melacini, S. Perotti, M. Rasini, E. Tappia, E-fulfilment and distribution in
omni-channel retailing: a systematic literature review, Int. J. Phys. Distrib.
Logist. Manag. 48 (4) (2018) 391–414.


[23] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, M. Jacomy, Gephi: an Open Source Software for
Exploring and Manipulating Networks Available at: https://gephi.org/
publications/gephi-bastian-feb09.pdf [Accessed: 05 September 2018], (2009) .


[24] K.H. Ahmed, A Decision Support Framework for Sustainable Supply Chain
Management. PhD Thesis, Loughborough University, 2017.


[25] B. Koteska, E. Karafiloski, A. Mishev, 6th Workshop of Software Quality,
Analysis, Monitoring, Improvement, and Applications. Belgrade, Serbia, 11-13
September 2017Blockchain Implementation Quality Challenges: A Literature


Fig. A2. Search and selection process of the studies.


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 97



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0125




Review2017, Blockchain Implementation Quality Challenges: A Literature
Review (2017) Belgrade:Serbia.


[26] T.M. Fernandez-Carames, P. Fraga-Lamas, A review on the use of Blockchain for
the Internet of Things, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 2169–3536.


[27] K. Rabah, Overview of blockchain as the engine of the 4th industrial revolution,
Mara Res. J. Bus. Manage. 1 (1) (2016) 125–135.


[28] K. Rabah, Agricultural food supply chain powered by big data and blockchain,
Mara Int. J. Sci. Res. Publ. 1 (1) (2017) 55–64.


[29] H.F. Atlam, A. Alenezi, M.O. Alassafi, G.B. Wills, Blockchain with Internet of
Things: benefits, challenges and future directions, Int. J. Intell. Syst. Appl. 10 (6)
(2018) 40–48.


[30] D. Davcev, L. Kocarev, A. Carbone, V. Stankovski, K. Mitreski, 8th International
Conference on Advances in Computing, Electronics and Electronical
Technology. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 3-4 February 2018Blockchain-Based
Distributed cloud/fog Platform for IoT Supply Chain Management2018,
Blockchain-Based Distributed cloud/fog Platform for IoT Supply Chain
Management (2018) Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia.


[31] H.Y. Wu, Z.J. Li, B. King, Z.B. Miled, J. Wassick, J. Tazelaar, A distributed ledger for
supply chain physical distribution visibility, Information 8 (4) (2017) 137–155.


[32] X. Xu, C. Pautasso, L. Zhu, V. Gramoli, A. Ponomarev, A.B. Tran, S. Chen, 13th
Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture. Venice, Italy, 5-6
April, 2016The Blockchain as a Software Connector2016, The Blockchain as a
Software Connector (2016) Rome: Italy.


[33] A. Imeri, D. Khadraoui, 9th IFIP International Conference on New Technologies,
Mobility and Security. Paris, France, 26-28 February 2018. Paris, FranceThe
Security and Traceability of Shared Information in the Process of
Transportation of Dangerous Goods2018, The Security and Traceability of
Shared Information in the Process of Transportation of Dangerous Goods
(2018).


[34] I. Weber, X. Xu, R. Riveret, G. Governatori, A. Ponomarev, J. Mendling,
Untrusted business process monitoring and execution using blockchain, in: M.
La Rosa, P. Loos, O. Paster (Eds.), Business Process Management. BPM 2016.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 9850, Springer, Cham, 2016.


[35] Z. Li, W.M. Wang, G. Liu, L. Liu, J. He, G.Q. Huang, Toward open manufacturing: a
cross-enterprise knowledge and services exchange framework based on
blockchain and edge computing, Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 118 (1) (2018) 303–
320.


[36] M. Maouchi, O. Ersoy, Z. Erkin, Proceedings of 1st ERICM Blockchain Workshop
2018. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8-9 MayTrade: A Transparent, Decentralized
Traceability System for the Supply Chain2018, Trade: A Transparent,
Decentralized Traceability System for the Supply Chain (2018) Amsterdam:
Netherlands.


[37] V.A.J. Boehm, J. Kim, J. Won-Ki Hong, Holistic tracking of products on the
blockchain using NFC and verified users, in: B.B.H. Kang, T. Kim (Eds.),
Information Security Applications, Springer, Cham, 2018.


[38] F. Tian, 13th International Conference on Service Systems and Service
Management. Kunming, China, 24-26 June 2016An Agri-Food Supply Chain
Traceability System for China Based on RFID & Blockchain Technology2016, An
Agri-Food Supply Chain Traceability System for China Based on RFID &
Blockchain Technology (2016) Beijing: China.


[39] P.S. Faye, 13th International Conference on Service Systems and Service
Management. Kuming, China, 24-26 June 2016Use of Blockchain Technology in
Agribusiness: Transparency and Monitoring in Agricultural Trade2017, Use of
Blockchain Technology in Agribusiness: Transparency and Monitoring in
Agricultural Trade (2017) Beijing: China.


[40] E.B. Hamida, K.L. Brousmiche, H. Levard, E. Thea, The Thirteenth International
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications. Nice, France, 23-27 July
2017Blockchain for Enterprise: Overview, Opportunities and Challenges2017,
Blockchain for Enterprise: Overview, Opportunities and Challenges (2017)
Paris: France.


[41] K. Christidis, M. Devetsikiotis, Blockchain and smart contracts for the internet
of things, IEEE Access 4 (2016) 2292–2303.


[42] M. Iansiti, K.R. Lakhani, The truth about blockchain, Harv. Bus. Rev. 95 (1)
(2017) 118–127.


[43] S.A. Abeyratne, R.P. Monfared, Blockchain ready manufacturing supply chain
using distributed ledger, Int. J. Res. Eng. Technol. 5 (9) (2016) 1–10.


[44] N. Hackius, M. Petersen, The Hamburg International Conference of Logistics.
Hamburg, Germany, 12-13 October 2017Blockchain in Logistics and Supply
Chain: Trick or Treat?2017, Blockchain in Logistics and Supply Chain: Trick or
Treat? (2017) Berlin: Germany.


[45] K. Rabah, Convergence of AI, IoT, big data and blockchain: a review, Lake Inst. J.
1 (1) (2018) 1–18.


[46] F. Tian, 14th International Conference on Service Systems and Service
Management. Dalian, China, 16-18 June 2017A Supply Chain Traceability
System for Food Safety Based on HACCP, Blockchain & Internet of Things2017, A
Supply Chain Traceability System for Food Safety Based on HACCP, Blockchain
& Internet of Things (2017) Beijing: China.


[47] K. Korpela, J. Hallikas, T. Dahlberg, Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Hawaii, USA, 4-7 January
2017Digital Supply Chain Transformation Toward Blockchain Integration2017,
Digital Supply Chain Transformation Toward Blockchain Integration (2017)
Washington: USA.


[48] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, Q. Wen, A survey on the security of blockchain
systems, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. (2017), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
future.2017.08.020.


[49] M.T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, A. Serhrouchni, Bubbles of trust: a
decentralized blockchain-based authentication system for IoT, Comput.
Secur. 78 (2018) 126–142.


[50] A. Reyna, C. Martin, J. Chen, E. Soler, M. Diaz, On blockchain and its integration
with IoT. challenges and opportunities, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 88 (2018)
173–190.


[51] V. Braun, V. Clarke, Using thematic analysis in psychology, Qual. Res. Psychol. 3
(2) (2006) 77–101.


[52] I. Holloway, L. Todres, The status of method: flexibility, consistency and
coherence, Qual. Res. 3 (2003) 345–357.


[53] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: a Peer-to-peer Electronic Cash System Available at:
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [Accessed at: 16 July 2018], (2008) .


[54] N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets Available at:
http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/
Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart_contracts_2.html
[Accessed: 14 March 2019], (1996) .


[55] T.M. Hughes, The global financial services industry and the blockchain, J.
Struct. Financ. 23 (4) (2018) 36–40.


[56] P.K. Sharma, J.H. Park, Blockchain based hybrid network architecture for the
smart city, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. Int. J. Sci. 86 (2018) 650–655.


[57] E.C. Cheng, Y. Le, J. Zhou, Y. Lu, Healthcare services across China – on
implementing an extensible universally unique patient identifier system, Int. J.
Healthc. Manag. 11 (3) (2018) 210–216.


[58] P. Lucena, A.P.D. Binotto, F. Silva Momo, H. Kim, Proceedings of the Symposium
on Foundations and Applications of Blockchain. Los Angeles, USA, 9 March
2018A Case Study for Grain Quality Assurance Tracking Based on Blockchain
Business Network2018, A Case Study for Grain Quality Assurance Tracking
Based on Blockchain Business Network (2018) Washington: USA.


[59] A. Poberezhna, Addressing water sustainability with blockchain technology
and green finance, in: A. Marke (Ed.), Transforming Climate Finance and
Green Investment With Blockchains, Academic Press, Cambridge, 2018, pp.
189–196.


[60] B. Murki, Blockchain technology in supply chain management: a review, Int.
Res. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. Innov. 5 (6) (2018) 2497–2500.


[61] N.M. Kumar, P.K. Mallick, Blockchain technology for security issues and
challenges in IoT, Procedia Comput. Sci. 132 (2018) 1815–1823.


[62] Z. Bilal, K. Martin, A hierarchical anti-counterfeit mechanism: securing the
supply chain using RFIDs, in: J.-L. Danger, M. Debbabi, J.-Y. Msarion, J. Garcia-
Alfaro, N. Zincir Heywood (Eds.), Foundations and Practice of Security,
Springer, Cham, 2013.


[63] V. Gupta, A Brief History of Blockchain. Harvard Business Review Available at:
https://hbr.org/2017/02/a-brief-history-of-blockchain [Accessed: 09 August
2018], (2017) .


[64] K. Croman, C. Decker, I. Eyal, A.E. Gencer, A. Juels, A. Kosba, A. Miller, P. Saxena,
E. Shi, E.G. Sirer, D. Song, R. Wattenhofer, 20th International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Barbados, 22-26 February 2016On
Scaling Decentralized Blockchains2016, On Scaling Decentralized Blockchains
(2016) Bridgetown: Barbados.


[65] A. Badzar, Blockchain for Securing Sustainable Transport Contracts and Supply
Chain Transparency – an Explorative Study of Blockchain Technology in
Logistics Available at: https://lup.lub.lu.se/student-papers/search/
publication/8880383 [Accessed: 8 August 2018], (2016) .


[66] D. Yermack, Corporate governance and blockchains, Rev. Financ. 21 (1) (2017)
7–31.


[67] K. Biswas, V. Muthukkumarasamy, W.L. Tan, Blockchain Based Wine Supply
Chain Traceability System. 2017 Future Technologies Conference. Vancouver,
Canada, 29-30 November 2017 Vancouver: Canada, (2017) .


[68] F. Yiannas, A new era of food transparency powered by blockchain, Innov.
Technol. Gov. Glob. 12 (1-2) (2018) 46–56.


[69] N. Kshetri, Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management
objectives, Int. J. Inf. Manage. 39 (2018) 80–89.


[70] M.V. Kumar, N.Ch.S.N. Iyengar, A framework for blockchain technology in rice
supply chain management, Adv. Sci. Technol. Lett. 146 (2017) 125–130.


[71] R. Neisse, G. Steri, I. Nai-Fovino, Proceedings for Data Accountability and
Provenance Tracking. Reggio Calabria, Italy, 29 August – 01 September 2017A
Blockchain-Based Approach for Data Accountability and Provenance
Tracking2017, A Blockchain-Based Approach for Data Accountability and
Provenance Tracking (2017) Rome: Italy.


[72] Cisco, Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast
Update, 2017-2022 Available at: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/
collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-index-vni/white-paper-c11-
738429.html [Accessed: 20 March 2019], (2019) .


[73] P. Triantafillou, N. Ntarmos, S. Nikoletseas, P. Spirakis, Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing. Linkoping,
Sweden, 1-3 Sep 2003NanoPeer Networks and P2P Worlds2003, NanoPeer
Networks and P2P Worlds (2003) Stockholm: Sweden.


[74] Statista, Blockchain Adoption Phases in Organizations Worldwide As of April,
2018 by Industry Available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/878748/
worldwide-production-phase-blockchain-technology-industry/ [Accessed:
27 March 2019], (2018) .


[75] Z. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhao, G. Zhu, Interactive effects of external knowledge
sources and internal resources on the innovation capability of Chinese
manufacturers, Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 116 (8) (2016) 1617–1635.


[76] G. Zhao, G. Zhang, M. Liu, S. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, AIP Conference Proceedings
1955Research on Manufacturing Service Behaviour Modelling Based on Block


98 G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0240

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.08.020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0380




Chain Theory2018, Research on Manufacturing Service Behaviour Modelling
Based on Block Chain Theory (2018) 30–35.


[77] Civic Ledger, Commercial Trail: Agricultural Water Trading Rights [Online]
Available at: https://www.civicledger.com/civic/ [Accessed: 8 August 2018],
(2017) .


[78] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, H. Wang, 2017 IEEE International Congress on
Big Data. Honolulu, USA, 25-30 June 2017An Overview of Blockchain
Technology: Architecture, Consensus, and Future Trends.2017, An Overview of
Blockchain Technology: Architecture, Consensus, and Future Trends. (2017)
Washington, USA.


[79] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, C. Papamanthou, 2016 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy. San Jose, USA, 22-26 May 2016The Blockchain Model of
Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts2016, The Blockchain
Model of Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts (2016)
Washington: USA.


[80] Q. Lu, X. Xu, Adaptable blockchain-based systems: a case study for product
traceability, IEEE Softw. 34 (6) (2017) 21–27.


[81] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M.K. Khan, N. Kumar, A survey on privacy protection
in blockchain system, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 126 (2019) 45–58.


[82] Monero, Available at, (2017) . [Accessed: 15 March 2019] https://www.
getmonero.org/.


[83] I.-C. Lin, T.-Z. Liao, A survey of blockchain security issues and challenges, Int. J.
Netw. Secur. 19 (5) (2017) 653–659.


[84] T. Aste, P. Tasca, T.D. Matteo, Blockchain technologies: the foreseeable impact
on society and industry, Computer 50 (9) (2017) 18–28.


[85] X. Xu, I. Weber, M. Staples, L. Zhu, J. Bosch, L. Bass, C. Pautasso, P. Rimba, IEEE
International Conference on Software Architecture. Gothenburg, Sweden, 3-7
April, 2017A Taxonomy of Blockchain-Based Systems for Architecture
Design2017, A Taxonomy of Blockchain-Based Systems for Architecture Design
(2017) Stockholm: Sweden.


[86] A. Jindal, G.S. Aujla, N. Kumar, SURVIVOR: a blockchain based edge-as-a-
service framework for secure energy trading in SDN-enabled vehicle-to-grid
environment, Comput. Netw. 153 (2019) 36–48.


[87] P.K. Sharma, N. Kumar, J.H. Park, Blockchain-based distributed framework for
automotive industry in a smart city, IEEE Trans. Industr. Inform. (2018), doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2887101.


[88] A. Banafa, IoTand Blockchain Convergence: Benefits and Challenges Available at:
https://iot.ieee.org/newsletter/january-2017/iot-and-blockchain-convergence-
benefits-and-challenges.html [Accessed: 15 August 2018], (2017) .


[89] I. Eyal, A.E. Gencer, E.G. Sirer, R. Van Renesse, Proceedings of the 13th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation. Santa Clara,
USA, 16-18 March 2016Bitcoin-NG: A Scalable Blockchain Protocol2016,
Bitcoin-NG: A Scalable Blockchain Protocol (2016) Washington: USA.


[90] Global Opportunity Report. Available at: https://www.unglobalcompact.org/
docs/publications/Global_Opportunity_Report_2017_SM.pdf, 2017. [Accessed
at: 16 July 2018].


G. Zhao et al. / Computers in Industry 109 (2019) 83–99 99



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0405

https://www.getmonero.org/

https://www.getmonero.org/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0435

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2887101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(18)30567-0/sbref0445

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/publications/Global_Opportunity_Report_2017_SM.pdf

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/publications/Global_Opportunity_Report_2017_SM.pdf


