









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Technological Forecasting & Social Change 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore 


Potentials of blockchain technology in supply chain management: Long-term 
judgments of an international expert panel 
Matthias Kopytoa, Sabrina Lechlera, Heiko A. von der Grachtb,⁎, Evi Hartmanna 
a Chair of Supply Chain Management, Friedrich-Alexander University Nuremberg, Lange Gasse 22, Nuremberg, Germany 
b School of International Business and Entrepreneurship, Steinbeis University, Kalkofenstr. 53, 71083 Herrenberg, Germany  


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords: 
Blockchain 
Future 
Technology 
Supply chain 
Expert judgments 
Delphi study 


A B S T R A C T   


Blockchain technology offers numerous fields of application, especially for supply chain management (SCM), as 
it could supersede the middleman activities in many transaction-based processes along the supply chain. 
Blockchain technology has a disruptive impact on supply chain design and operations, making the exploration of 
future application scenarios of great importance. However, knowledge in this field remains scarce, despite the 
subject's strategical value. This empirical study addresses this gap by conducting an interdisciplinary Delphi 
survey. Long-term judgments from an international panel of 108 designated experts from academia, industry, 
and politics/associations with different context-related backgrounds (blockchain, SCM, hybrid functions) were 
systematically analyzed. The results reveal prospective scenarios how blockchains will be applied in SCM by 
2035 and which SCM-specific obstacles need to be solved in advance. One key finding reveals that even though 
blockchain technology is said to enable transactions between untrusted parties, trust-related advantages of 
blockchain technology are not directly transferable to SCM without additional conditions. Counterintuitively, 
active trust management between supply chain partners will still be needed. Nonetheless, this research reveals 
that blockchain technology will be strongly applied in SCM by 2035 and thus provides beneficial orientation and 
stimulating perspectives for decision-makers in the field.   


1. Introduction 


Blockchain has become a common buzzword, first gaining attention 
with the introduction of Bitcoin by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008. The 
initiator's original aim with Bitcoin was the resolution of the financial 
double-spending problem (Nakamoto, 2008). Since then, various other 
cryptocurrencies have emerged, and the total market capitalization of 
cryptocurrencies grew from 1.3 billion USD in May 2013 to over 200 
billion USD in March 2020 (CoinMarketCap, 2020). In addition to 
cryptocurrencies, further application possibilities for blockchain – Bit-
coin's underlying technology – were discovered, including registration 
of electronic voting, certification of product quality, healthcare, ver-
ified consumer reviews, escrow, and tracing of products (White, 2017;  
Hsiao et al., 2018; Borioli and Couturier, 2018). Nowadays, blockchain 
technology is expected to fundamentally change companies, economies, 
and social systems (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2017), as the technology's 
potential impact is on the same level as game-changing innovations 
such as the wheel, the steam engine, and the Internet (Mettler, 2016). 


Numerous blockchain-based use cases have been discussed in the 


context of supply chain management (SCM) as well (Wang et al., 2018;  
Wamba and Queiroz, 2020). By investigating selected blockchain-re-
lated cases, Kshetri (2018) found that blockchain technology has the 
potential to meet key SCM objectives such as costs, speed, depend-
ability, risk reduction, sustainability, and flexibility. Despite these ad-
vantages, doubts about blockchain's real potentials for SCM have also 
been expressed. In this context, Ammous (2016, p. 1) stated that 
blockchain is “unlikely to offer economic advantages for any commer-
cial problem other than the one it was specifically engineered to solve.” 
There are also various barriers mentioned in the literature that could 
hinder the broad implementation of this technology for supply chain 
purposes. These include, blockchain's high electricity consumption 
(Foth, 2017; Sikorski et al., 2017), scalability problems (Foth, 2017;  
Tian, 2017; Preuveneers et al., 2017), the lack of blockchain-related 
regulations and laws (Yeoh, 2017), the interoperability of blockchain 
systems (Underwood, 2016), missing blockchain knowledge within 
organizations (Partida, 2018; Shanley, 2017), and the complex en-
vironment of global supply chains (Kshetri, 2018). 


These contrary views indicate a high uncertainty regarding the 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330 
Received 1 March 2019; Received in revised form 16 July 2020; Accepted 15 September 2020    


⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: matthias.kopyto@fau.de (M. Kopyto), sabrina.lechler@fau.de (S. Lechler), vondergracht@steinbeis-sibe.de (H.A. von der Gracht),  


evi.hartmann@fau.de (E. Hartmann). 



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00401625









https://www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330

mailto:matthias.kopyto@fau.de

mailto:sabrina.lechler@fau.de

mailto:vondergracht@steinbeis-sibe.de

mailto:evi.hartmann@fau.de

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330&domain=pdf




future of blockchain technology in SCM. Nevertheless, managers and 
policymakers are currently confronted with strategic decisions re-
garding this technology, as they fear missing out on blockchain's po-
tential benefits. In such uncertain situations, the judgments of experts 
are often the only source of information to reduce uncertainty and 
improve decision quality (Gray and Hovav, 2008; Skulmoski et al., 
2007; Rowe et al., 1991). However, a comprehensive review1 of ex-
isting research revealed that experts’ opinions on this subject have not 
yet been systematically gathered. So far, blockchain's technical aspects 
have been studied, but empirical research is almost completely absent 
(Wamba and Queiroz, 2020). Empirical investigation into the techno-
logy's practical usefulness for broad implementation, as well as its ac-
tual influence on the current SCM regime, is therefore invaluable and 
needs to be expanded (Wang et al., 2018). To create a clearer picture of 
its potentials and to close the existing gap in the literature by extending 
empirical knowledge on blockchain technology in SCM, the following 
research question (RQ) is proposed: 


RQ: What application scenarios and potentials of blockchain tech-
nology are likely to be seen in supply chain management by 2035? 


In order to answer the proposed RQ, a Delphi survey was conducted 
and the long-term judgments of an international panel of 108 desig-
nated experts from academia, industry, and politics/associations with 
different context-related backgrounds (Blockchain, SCM, hybrid func-
tions) were analyzed. The expert panel evaluated the probability of 
occurrence, impact on the industry, and desirability of 15 far-future 
events related to application scenarios of blockchain technology. This 
approach was chosen because assessments of long-term expert judg-
ments (e.g., through the application of the Delphi method) are an es-
tablished process for studies of future scenarios and the investigation of 
complex and uncertain circumstances (Rowe and Wright, 1999;  
Winkler et al., 2015). In addition, this approach has a long history as an 
accepted research method in the Journal of Technol. Forecast. Social 
Change (Schoeman and Mahajan, 1977; Melander et al., 2019) and in 
SCM in general (Klassen and Whybark, 1994; Ogden et al., 2005;  
Hirschinger et al., 2015), and it has also proved its added value in 
current managerial decision-making settings (Phadnis, 2019). 


In order to provide a holistic picture of the likely future of block-
chain technology in SCM based on the research findings, the paper is 
structured as follows. After a review of the relevant literature on 
blockchain technology, a detailed description of the research metho-
dology is provided. Afterward, the quantitative and qualitative results 
of the long-term judgment analysis are presented and discussed, from 
which theoretical and practical implications are derived. The paper 
concludes with a summary of the main findings. 


2. Background and literature review 


2.1. Fundamentals of blockchain technology 


A blockchain is, in essence, a distributed database or digital ledger 
that contains all records that result from transactions and events within 
a network of participants (Crosby et al., 2016). More specifically, re-
cords of network transactions are stored in blocks, which are chron-
ologically linked to each other by cryptographic hashes and thus col-
lectively create a chain of blocks (Bogart and Rice, 2015; Christidis and 
Devetsikiotis, 2016). Before a new block is added to the existing chain 
of blocks, its integrity has to be confirmed by the majority of network 
nodes according to pre-defined consensus-based validation protocols 
(Zheng et al., 2017). Once the verification takes place, the information 


within a block can no longer be altered (Nakamoto, 2008). 
Due to the design principles of a blockchain, certain advantages 


emerge. First, a full copy of the blockchain is stored on every node of a 
network and not on a single server. This distributed nature of the 
technology increases information transparency, as data is visible to all 
network participants (Abeyratne and Monfared, 2016; Casey and 
Wong, 2017). Second, manipulation can be preempted, because data 
cannot be altered once written in a block, and validity has to be con-
firmed by the majority of network participants (Abeyratne and 
Monfared, 2016; Kshetri, 2017a, 2017b; Preuveneers et al., 2017;  
Khan and Salah, 2018). Third, the inalterability of blockchain data al-
lows unrestricted traceability of transactions (Abeyratne and 
Monfared, 2016; Kshetri, 2017a; Lee and Pilkington, 2017). Fourth, as 
trust is replaced by cryptographic proof, untrusted parties can directly 
transact with each other without the attendance of a trusted third party 
(e.g., a financial institution) (Weber et al., 2016; Nakasumi, 2017). 
Fifth, due to the absence of an intermediating party, transaction costs 
can be reduced (Ahram et al., 2017; Korpela et al., 2017; Polim et al., 
2017). 


Three main types of blockchain architecture can be distinguished: 
public blockchain, consortium blockchain, and private blockchain 
(Zheng et al., 2017). Table 1 compares their attributes. 


The most famous example of a public (permissionless) blockchain is 
the Bitcoin system, where everyone is allowed to enter the network and 
participate in the consensus and verification process (Pilkington, 2016). 
A public or open blockchain gives reading permission to all system 
users and is a so-called decentralized network, as all records of trans-
actions are stored on every node within the network (Zheng et al., 
2017). A private (permissioned) blockchain, in contrast, limits reading 
permissions and access to the network to authorized users only 
(O'Leary, 2017). It is fully controlled by a central authority responsible 
for consensus finding and is therefore referred to as a centralized net-
work (Zheng et al., 2017). Consortium blockchains are a combination of 
public and private blockchain architecture (Pilkington, 2016). This 
network type usually differs between decision-making nodes and read- 
only nodes, where the former are allowed to participate in the con-
sensus process to add new blocks to the chain and the latter have 
permission to review the ledger but cannot participate in any other 
processes (Lu and Xu, 2017). Consortium blockchains are partially 
centralized (Zheng et al., 2017). 


Blockchains are often mentioned in the same sentence as crypto-
currencies, but operating a blockchain does not necessarily imply a 
cryptocurrency. In fact, the original purpose of cryptocurrencies was to 
provide an economic incentive to a decentralized operating group to 
validate the transactions made in a blockchain (Tschorsch and 
Scheuermann, 2016). Cryptocurrencies may be useful for keeping 
public blockchains running, but they are not a necessity for operating 
private blockchains, as private blockchains are fully maintained by one 
organization. In addition to cryptocurrencies, smart contracts are an-
other feature frequently referred to in blockchain discussions. Certain 
blockchain protocols (e.g., Ethereum) allow the execution of smart 
contracts. They are integrated into blockchains and can be character-
ized as programmed scripts that activate themselves when receiving 
pre-defined transactions (Christidis and Devetsikiotis, 2016). These 
scripts enable automated transactions – for example, automated pur-
chasing or payments between two parties (Collomb and Sok, 2016). 


2.2. Blockchain technology in supply chain management 


As SCM has been identified as one of blockchain's promising ap-
plication areas in addition to finance (White, 2017), it is not surprising 
that practitioners and scientists from this domain have started to en-
gage with this topic. Famous prototypes and use cases include Wal-
mart's food product tracking system and Maersk and IBM's collabora-
tively established platform, TradeLens, which enables information 
sharing and supply chain visibility. Nevertheless, blockchain 


1 Database selection: Scopus, Business Source Complete, and ScienceDirect; 
Time horizon: 2008 – March 2020; Search Terms: (“blockchain” OR “dis-
tributed ledger”) AND (“supply chain” OR “supply network” OR “logistics” OR 
“production” OR “manufacturing” OR “operations” OR “procurement” OR 
“distribution” OR “delivery” OR “shipping”) 


M. Kopyto, et al.   










applications are not yet in general use in SCM, as industry participants 
are still working on proofing blockchain concepts and implementing 
pilots (Banker, 2018). 


Scientific research on this topic is also still at an early stage, and no 
article on the subject was published before 2016 (Müßigmann et al., 
2020). From the entirety of SCM-related blockchain papers, approxi-
mately one third of the articles can be labeled as magazine articles, 
where the topic of blockchain in SCM only receives superficial cov-
erage. One third of papers were published at conferences, while the 
other third can be referred to as scientific journal articles. While ma-
gazine articles mostly deal with the advantages of blockchain tech-
nology for SCM in general (e.g., Loop, 2016; Garrett, 2017;  
Riley, 2017), conference and scientific journal articles mainly propose 
blockchain concepts for SCM-specific use cases. Table 2 provides an 
overview of research articles that have addressed blockchain tech-
nology in the field of SCM. 


Different blockchain architectures may be needed for different use 
cases, the two most frequently used ones in SCM are Ethereum and 
Hyperledger Fabric (Wang et al., 2018). Both of these systems support 
the execution of smart contracts (not every blockchain has smart con-
tract features), which opens the field for blockchain-based applications 
in SCM even more. Smart contracts may, for example, automate pay-
ments between a supplier and a buyer as soon as the purchased product 
is delivered (Swan, 2015) or transfer ownership rights as soon as a 
payment has been received (Wang et al., 2017). 


Most of these research projects focus on the technical feasibility of 
blockchain applications. However, the exploration of blockchain's 
technical feasibility is insufficient to assess its potential for broad im-
plementation in SCM, as technological transition does not depend on 
technology-related aspects alone. It also requires other shifts of a re-
gime (e.g., changes related to culture, science, industry, user practices, 
and policy) (Geels, 2004). According to Geels (2002), radical innova-
tions – which is how blockchain can be defined (Beck and Mueller- 
Bloch, 2017; Morabito, 2017; Crosby et al., 2016) – only break out of 
their niche-level when a window of opportunity is created. A window 
occurs when shifts at the macro-level (landscape developments) – such 
as changes related to macro-economics, deep cultural patterns, and 
macro-political development – put pressure on a regime such as SCM 
(Geels and Schot, 2007). 


Some central trends can be identified that put pressure on the cur-
rent SCM regime. One is the rising global competition, which is trig-
gered by ongoing globalization and the geographical expansion of 
manufacturing networks (Ferdows et al., 2016). Striving for efficiency is 
becoming increasingly important for survival in the global market, and 
supply chain processes thus have to be efficient regarding performance, 
quality, and costs (Christopher and Towill, 2001). Another global shift 
influencing SCM is the increasing customer demand for transparency, 
accountability, and social responsibility (Lee and Pilkington, 2017). 
Consequently, supply chain processes have to become transparent to 
fulfill customers’ requests. 


The described landscape developments show that a window of op-
portunity for blockchain technology is created, as blockchain is said to 
increase transparency as well as efficiency (Casey and Wong, 2017;  
Tian, 2017). Nevertheless, the question arises as to whether blockchain 
technology can be incorporated into the current SCM regime and 
whether it is capable of taking advantage of the window of opportunity. 
This study answers this question by considering experts’ long-term 
judgments. 


3. Research methodology 


This research employed a Delphi survey to study forthcoming de-
velopments of blockchain technology in SCM. The study is structured in 
four individual phases, which are displayed in Fig. 1. 


3.1. The Delphi method 


The Delphi method has a proven record in judgmental foresight 
research (Torres, 2005) and is particularly suitable for long-term re-
search objectives (15–30 years), where uncertainty is high or there is 
insufficient information available (Gray and Hovav, 2008;  
Skulmoski et al., 2007; Rowe et al., 1991), and expert knowledge de-
scribes the only source of data (Linstone and Turoff, 1975;  
Rikkonen and Tapio, 2009). The Delphi method provides an efficiently 
structured group communication process to obtain and exchange expert 
opinions concerning an uncertainty-bearing field, making it a highly 
suitable instrument for futures research (Winkler and Moser, 2016). As 
Dalkey defines, “Delphi is the name of a set of procedures for eliciting 


Table 1 
Attributes of public, consortium, and private blockchains.      


Attribute Public blockchain Consortium blockchain Private blockchain  


Type of network Decentralized Partially decentralized Centralized 
Authorization to read Public Limited to authorized users Limited to authorized users 
Permission to participate Permissionless Permissioned Permissioned 
Consensus finding All nodes of the network Selected nodes with decision-making rights Central authority 


Table 2 
Classification of blockchain articles by application domain or context.    


Blockchain application domain References  


General advantages of blockchain technology for SCM Loop (2016); Garrett (2017); Riley (2017) 
Track and Trace Foth (2017); Alangot and Achuthan (2017); Haughwout (2018); Tse et al. (2017); Tian (2017); Tian (2016);  


Gao et al. (2018); Wu et al. (2017) 
Temperature recording Bocek et al. (2017) 
Quality management Chen et al. (2017) 
Inventory management Madhwal and Panfilov (2017) 
Performance and usage monitoring Madhwal and Panfilov (2017) 
Proof of origin and originality Foth (2017); Madhwal and Panfilov (2017); Mackey and Nayyar (2017) 
Supply chain integration Korpela et al. (2017); Weber et al. (2016) 
Information sharing Nakasumi (2017); Abeyratne and Monfared (2016); van Engelenburg et al. (2017) 
Negotiation support regarding logistic contracts Polim et al. (2017) 
Blockchain-driven IoT services Khan and Salah (2018); Liao et al. (2017); Christidis and Devetsikiotis (2016); Kshetri (2017a); Kshetri (2017b);  


Preuveneers et al. (2017) 
Digital rights management for additive manufacturing Holland et al. (2017); Kurpjuweit et al. (2019) 


M. Kopyto, et al.   


















and refining the opinions of a group of people” (Dalkey, 1967, p. 1). 
The Delphi procedure is divided into several sections. First, Delphi 
panelists anonymously evaluate future-oriented propositions (so-called 
projections) according to specific numerical variables such as their 
likelihood of occurrence or their impact (von der Gracht, 2012;  
Rowe and Wright, 2001). At this point, the panelists are also asked to 
enrich their quantitative assessments with written, qualitative justifi-
cations (Graefe and Armstrong, 2011). Subsequently, the participants 
receive feedback about the group opinion and have the option to adjust 
their initial answers based on the provided feedback (Rowe and 
Wright, 1999; Webler et al., 1991). These steps may be repeated several 
times. While this procedure was originally applied to create consensus 
among experts regarding particular propositions (Diamond et al., 2014;  
Linstone and Turoff, 1975), today the goal of Delphi studies is to foster 
a reliable group opinion (Landeta, 2006), which is also the focus of this 
research. 


Although different types of Delphi exist, the general Delphi design 
builds on four principles: (1) anonymity; (2) iteration; (3) controlled 
feedback; and (4) statistical group response (Dalkey and Helmer, 1963;  
Rowe and Wright, 2001). The underlying anonymity enables mitigation 
of negative group constraints such as the bandwagon effect, the halo 
effect, or withholding of potentially unpopular opinions 
(Steinert, 2009; Dinwoodie et al., 2014). Iterations and controlled 
feedback enable systematic multi-rounded discussions, social learning, 
and the revising of prior judgments (Dunn, 2004). Statistical group 
responses may be returned numerically (typically in tabular format) or 
graphically (typically in boxplot format). In general, the presentation of 


results includes tendency measures such as a median or mean of the 
assessments, interquartile ranges as a measure of consensus, or the 
change in standard deviation as a measure for convergence during the 
single Delphi rounds (Gupta and Clarke, 1996; von der Gracht, 2012). 
Properly conducted Delphi studies show higher accuracy in forecasts 
than conventional surveys (Rowe and Wright, 1999; von der 
Gracht, 2008) and have proven their reliability and validity in various 
studies (Landeta, 2006; Parenté and Anderson-Parenté, 2011). 


3.2. Step 1: development of Delphi projections 


As with conventional surveys, the development and design of 
questions and projections is of particular importance for ensuring value, 
validity, and reliability in Delphi studies (Markmann et al., 2020;  
Mitchell, 1996; Loveridge, 2002). A rigorous and established multi- 
stage process was therefore performed to develop concise and thought- 
provoking projections (Jiang et al., 2017; Roßmann et al., 2018;  
Fritschy and Spinler, 2019; von der Gracht and Darkow, 2010). An 
overview of the projection development process is illustrated in step 1 
of Fig. 1. 


First, relevant journal and conference articles2 along with online 
and blog posts were screened to identify relevant factors concerning the 
future of blockchain technology in SCM. Additionally, a small-scale 


Fig. 1. Structure of the Delphi process applied in the study, own design based on Gnatzy et al. (2011).  


2 Example of key sources: e.g. Abeyratne and Monfared (2016);  
Crosby et al. (2016); Tian (2016); Bocek et al. (2017); Korpela et al. (2017);  
Kshetri (2017b); Wang et al. (2018). 


M. Kopyto, et al.   






survey among industry experts and academics was performed to detect 
further factors and to triangulate the screening process, ensuring that 
all relevant issues were collected for projection development 
(Gausemeier et al., 1998). For the small-scale survey, international 
experts from industrialized countries who have published relevant pa-
pers or books, reported at a conference, or publicly talked about 
blockchain technology were invited to participate. Experts were con-
tacted via email and were asked to share (a minimum) of five keywords 
that came to their minds when thinking about the future of blockchain 
technology. The survey was executed until redundancies and decreasing 
returns of new aspects were experienced at large scale. At this point, 32 
of the 68 contacted experts had replied to the request, equivalent to a 
response rate of 48%. Altogether, a longlist of 287 factors concerning 
the future of blockchain technology in SCM was generated through desk 
research and the provision of the experts’ keywords. 


The longlist was then condensed into a shortlist by two members of 
the research team through the deletion of duplicated factors and the 
aggregation of factors with similar meanings. After this consolidation, 
70 factors remained. Next, we followed the approach of  
Roßmann et al. (2018) and organized an internal projection develop-
ment workshop with three members of the research team. The work-
shop was conducted to cross-validate the shortlist of the previous step 
and to develop initial projections. To ensure that the projections did not 
only relate to blockchain's technological features, Geels’ (2004) multi- 
level perspective on technology transition was deployed to also include 
aspects regarding culture, science, industry, user practices, and policy. 
With the multi-level perspective in mind, 33 provisional projections 
were derived. To guarantee high validity and reliability of the obtained 
projections, methodical rules concerning the formulation (Rowe and 
Wright, 2001) and optimal number of words (Salancik et al., 1971;  
Linstone and Turoff, 1975) were applied. Moreover, since a high 
number of projections may lead to a reduced response rate and increase 
the probability of a sparse completion of the questionnaires (Parenté 
and Anderson-Parenté, 1987; Johnson, 1976), the number of projec-
tions was further decreased to 15. This is in line with (Parenté and 
Anderson-Parenté, 2011), who proposed limiting the number of pro-
jections to a maximum of 20. Factors that were not yet applied for 
projection formulation and factors linked to the eliminated projections 
were utilized to formulate starting pro and contra arguments for the 
first participating expert. Thus, no information was lost throughout the 
projection development process. 


Finally, as proposed by Warth et al. (2013), the Delphi ques-
tionnaire was pre-tested by seven academics with deep methodological 
and/or subject-specific knowledge in this field, who checked the pro-
jections for precision, completeness, plausibility, and methodological 
soundness to ensure face and content validity. Their feedback resulted 
in slight adaptations to the questionnaire regarding wording and 
syntax. The final set included 15 projections regarding the future of 
blockchain in SCM for the year 2035, which are presented in Table 3. 


3.3. Step 2: selection of experts 


Reliability of Delphi survey results strongly depends on an adequate 
choice of panelists (Spickermann et al., 2014; Okoli and 
Pawlowski, 2004). Based on this fact, the expert panel was system-
atically selected in order to achieve a high level of heterogeneity and to 
reduce various participants’ cognitive biases, such as framing bias and 
anchoring bias (Winkler and Moser, 2016), desirability bias 
(Ecken et al., 2011), and the bandwagon effect (Foerster and von der 
Gracht, 2014). Heterogeneity was achieved through the involvement of 
experts from various domains such as Logistics, SCM, and Information 
Technology (IT), a high spread of different countries, and through the 
inclusion of designated experts from academia, industry, and politics/ 
associations. Consequently, 1114 potential experts with expertise re-
lated to the research topic were invited to participate in the expert 
panel. While some contacts can be clearly identified and classified as 


blockchain experts due to their presence in the media or through the 
publication of their studies, this is not evident for others, especially in 
the industrial sector. To ensure that the Delphi panel only covers ex-
perts, those participants for whom it was not immediately obvious 
whether they provide expert-level knowledge on blockchains were 
asked to provide an additional self-assessment. Only if their answers 
indicated considerable experience and knowledge in the field of 
blockchains were those participants’ judgements further evaluated and 
processed in our study. After the self-assessment, we excluded the re-
sponses of seven panelists from further investigation in the study, re-
sulting in a final total of 108 participating experts from 20 different 
countries3. The methodology of self-rating has been confirmed as a 
legitimate instrument for selecting panels (Rowe and Wright, 1996). By 
taking these steps, we ensured that the respondents we included were 
experts in the blockchain area. 


The final response rate of 9.7% was found to be adequate for the 
research aim and is similar to of the rates in comparable Delphi studies 
(e.g. Spickermann et al., 2014; Warth et al., 2013). The responses of 54 
experts from academia, 31 from industry, and 23 from politics/asso-
ciations were analyzed in the Delphi study. Sixty of these panelists deal 
with blockchain technology from a data science perspective in their 
day-to-day business. Seventeen of them can be designated as SCM ex-
perts with a data science background, while 31 of the experts specifi-
cally concentrate on the intersection of blockchain technology and SCM 
through engagement in pilot projects or research studies (see step 2 in  
Fig. 1). 


To verify a possible non-response bias, the Mann–Withney U-test 
was applied. In this process, the estimates of the early and late re-
spondents were compared, as it can be assumed that late respondents 
demonstrate characteristics of non-respondents (Armstrong and 
Overton, 1977; Wagner and Kemmerling, 2010). By comparing the 
differences in responses for all 15 projections, no significant differences 
(p < 0.05), and thus no non-response bias, could be found. 


3.4. Step 3: execution of the Delphi study 


In this study, an internet-based real-time Delphi approach was de-
ployed (Aengenheyster et al., 2017; Geist, 2010; Gnatzy et al., 2011;  
Gordon and Pease, 2006), where the quantitative analysis of the pa-
nelists’ assessments (calculation of group opinion and boxplots in-
dicating additional statistics) is executed immediately. This variant 
enables a faster return of group feedback to the participants compared 
to conventional “paper-and-pencil” Delphi studies. Research by  
Gnatzy et al. (2011) compared both types of Delphi studies and re-
vealed that results are comparable, while the real-time approach is 
likely to have a more positive effect on response rates and validity due 
to its convenience in terms of process, appearance, and reduced effort 
(time). 


Regarding the quantitative assessment, each expert was asked to 
rate the projections according to their  


• Expected probability of occurrence (EP), based on a metric scale of 
0–100%,  


• Impact on the industry (I), based on a 5-point Likert scale, and  • Desirability of occurrence (D), based on a 5-point Likert scale. 
Additionally, participants had the opportunity to add qualitative 


justifications for their given quantitative estimates. Immediately after 
their initial assessment, the real-time Delphi tool generated quantitative 
feedback (descriptive statistics and boxplot graphs for group opinion) 
and qualitative feedback (other experts’ written justifications), 


3 Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands, Singapore, Swiss, 
Taiwan, UK, and USA 


M. Kopyto, et al.   






summarizing the estimations of previously participating experts. Based 
on this real-time feedback, panelists could reassess their provided es-
timates as often as desired until the end of the survey period (see step 3 
in Fig. 1). Returning both the quantitative assessments and the quali-
tative justifications to the panelists increases the accuracy of the final 
results (Best, 1974). More detailed information on the deployed real- 
time Delphi approach can be found in the article by  
Gnatzy et al. (2011). 


3.5. Step 4: survey analysis 


In order to visualize the groups’ long-term judgments regarding the 
expected probability, impact, and desirability of the projections under 
investigation, their respective arithmetic mean values were determined 
(Jiang et al., 2017; Roßmann et al., 2018; Fritschy and Spinler, 2019;  
von der Gracht and Darkow, 2010). Moreover, for further analysis of 
the experts’ opinions about the projections’ probabilities of occurrence, 
two additional measures were calculated for each projection:  


• Convergence rates (CV), and  • Interquartile ranges (IQR). 
Convergence rates provide information about the panels’ shift in 


assessments and have been measured as the difference in standard de-
viation of the average probability expectations from the first to the last 
Delphi round. Interquartile ranges indicate the final consensus/dissent 
levels for each projection. This study followed Warth et al. (2013) and  
Keller and von der Gracht (2014) and defined an interquartile range of 
≤ 25 as the threshold level for consensus about the probability of oc-
currence. 


In addition to the quantitative assessment, the expert panel pro-
vided 1270 written comments, which is equivalent to 11.75 arguments 
per expert. Overall, 62% of the experts provided at least one rationale 
for their quantitative estimations, indicating a high level of participa-
tion. To enhance the qualitative analysis of these comments, a coding 
method based on Strauss and Corbin (1990) was applied. In this pro-
cess, the content of the arguments was independently broken down by 
two members of the research team to identify categories to which the 
arguments could be assigned. Descriptive codes for the arguments were 
thus derived. Subsequently, all codes were discussed by the two re-
searchers in order to re-adjust divergent coding results until consensus 
was achieved. The final set of codes and the quantitative estimations 


were utilized for the discussion of the expert's long-term judgments. 


4. Results and discussion 


4.1. Analysis of quantitative results 


The experts’ quantitative assessments were analyzed first. Table 3 
illustrates the mean values of the projections’ impact, desirability, and 
expected probability, as well as its convergence rate and interquartile 
range. 


The results revealed that the occurrence of all reviewed projections 
would have a non-negligible impact on SCM, as the mean value for the 
estimated impact of every projection was rated higher than 3.0. Thus, 
all projections were further considered for analysis. With a mean value 
of 4.3 on the 5-point Likert scale, Projection 3 (smart contracts) is an-
ticipated to have the highest influence on SCM. There are two projec-
tions, Projection 13 (data manipulation) and Projection 14 (integrated 
blockchain), whose occurrence is not desired by the majority of the 
participating experts. The occurrence of the remaining 13 projections is 
desired, as their average desirability values are higher than 3.0, ranging 
from 3.2 for Projection 15 (cryptocurrencies) to 4.5 for Projection 12 
(technological problems). The average values of the projections’ prob-
ability range from 33% for Projection 14 (integrated blockchain) to 
73% for Projection 10 (job profiles). Calculating the interquartile 
ranges of the experts’ probability expectations revealed that by ap-
plying the common threshold value of ≤ 25, Projection 9 (product- 
related information) and Projection 11 (risk management) yield con-
sensus. 


Furthermore, a closer look at the negative convergence rates of all 
projections (see Table 3) reveals that the experts’ opinions converged 
over time. In total, standard deviation decreased by 5.3%, which in-
dicates a convergence toward group consensus. Overall, 483 revisions 
conducted by the experts during the Delphi runtime were recorded, 
whereof 253 assessments (52%) were adjusted upwards and 230 (48%) 
downwards. On the individual projection level, experts increased their 
estimates regarding the probability of occurrence for ten projections 
and decreased them for the remaining five projections. The strongest 
convergence could be observed for Projection 10 (job profiles) with a 
12.2% decrease in standard deviation. The lowest convergence rate, 
-2.6%, was measured for Projection 11 (risk management). This further 
indicates that the participating experts were the most confident with 
the assessment of this proposition. 


Table 3 
Analysis of experts’ ratings.         


No. Projection EP IQR CV I D 


P1 2035: A global legal framework for the application of blockchain technology in supply chain management has been established. 55% 54 - 4.8% 4.0 3.8 
P2 2035: Blockchain technology has fundamentally improved companies' compliance with sustainability standards. 56% 39 - 4.1% 3.6 4.2 
P3 2035: Smart contracts have largely replaced operational supply chain tasks. 64% 30 - 5.1% 4.3 4.2 
P4 2035: Blockchain technology has created end-to-end transparency within multi-tier supply networks. 64% 30 - 7.9% 4.2 4.2 
P5 2035: Active trust management between supply chain partners has lost its relevance due to blockchain technology. 42% 26 - 7.7% 3.3 3.3 
P6 2035: Blockchain technology has evolved into the dominant standard for tracing material flows. 62% 30 - 3.3% 3.9 3.9 
P7 2035: Access to blockchain data has fundamentally improved demand planning. 54% 40 - 3.4% 3.7 3.7 
P8 2035: Blockchain technology has been the key trigger for the revolutionary expansion of the digital interconnection of objects and devices 


(e.g., Internet of Things). 
56% 40 - 3.4% 3.9 3.6 


P9 2035: The exchange of product-related information (e.g., manufacturers’ ID, price, CO2-emission, working conditions) through 
blockchain technology has become an imperative for supply chain management. 


65% 20 - 4.1% 3.8 3.9 


P10 2035: New job profiles in supply chain management have been created due to blockchain technology. 73% 30 - 12.2% 3.5 3.5 
P11 2035: Blockchain technology has fundamentally improved supply chain risk management. 69% 20 - 2.6% 3.9 4.1 
P12 2035: Former technological problems with blockchain technology have been resolved (e.g., scalability issues, limited data storage 


capacities, block creation times, high transaction costs, high power consumption). 
72% 30 - 4.1% 4.1 4.5 


P13 2035: The manipulation of data has become a serious threat to blockchain technology. 41% 40 - 4.3% 3.6 1.6 
P14 2035: Multiple specialized blockchains (e.g., for financial transactions, tracing of goods, proof of origin) have been replaced by one 


integrated multi-purpose blockchain. 
33% 40 - 7.4% 3.5 2.8 


P15 2035: Cryptocurrencies have become the standard means of payment for business-to-business transactions. 46% 45 - 5.8% 3.6 3.2 


Note: EP: Expected probability; I: Impact; D: Desirability; CV: Convergence (i.e., decrease in standard deviation); IQR: Interquartile Range; IQR ≤ 25 equals panel 
consensus, highlighted in italics  


M. Kopyto, et al.   










In addition to analysis on an aggregated panel level, further insights 
can be provided by a deep dive into the ratings of individual subgroups 
(see Tables 4a and 4b). The above analysis was therefore extended by 
two different subgroup comparisons. The idea behind subgroup com-
parisons is that experts with different backgrounds may show differ-
entiating expectations regarding the future of blockchain technology in 
SCM. In line with Roßmann et al. (2018), the first subgroup comparison 
classified the panel members according to their type of organization – 
academia (n = 54), industry (n = 31), and politics/associations 
(n = 23) – and it was analyzed whether the stated expectations differ 
between these three types. The second subgroup comparison divided 
the panel into experts with experience in blockchain technology 
(n = 60), SCM (n = 17), and both domains (n = 31) and determined 
whether differences in ratings according to professional background 
appeared. 


A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test confirmed a non-normal distribution for 
all six subgroups. A non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis H-test was then 
conducted for the first subgroup comparison. The results revealed that 
the estimates for the probabilities of Projection 1 (global legal frame-
work) and Projection 6 (tracing material flows), the impact of 
Projection 5 (trust management), and the desirability of Projection 12 
(technological problems) differ significantly from each other. In order 
to determine which of the three subgroups was responsible for the 
significant difference, a post hoc Mann–Whitney U-test was performed. 


The comparison revealed that the probability estimations for 
Projection 1 (global legal framework) differ significantly between ex-
perts from academia and politics/associations (p < 0.05), with aca-
demia rating the probability of occurrence lower on average (48% 
compared to 67%). Furthermore, the estimates of academics and in-
dustry experts differ significantly for the impact of Projection 5 (trust 
management) (3.6 compared to 3.0) and for the probability of 
Projection 6 (tracing material flows) (56% compared to 67%). It was 
further revealed that the estimates of all three subgroups show sig-
nificant differences for the desirability of Projection 12 (technological 
problems), which was rated at 4.1 by experts from politics/associations, 
4.4 by industry experts, and 4.8 by academics. 


The second subgroup comparison, which compared the estimates 
provided by experts with experience in blockchain technology, SCM, 
and both domains, was conducted in a similar manner to the first. It 
revealed that the estimates regarding the desirability of Projection 14 
(integrated blockchain) differ significantly between all three subgroups. 


Thus, experts with experience in blockchain technology rate the evo-
lution of one integrated multi-purpose blockchain the least desirable 
(with an average rating of 2.5), followed by hybrid experts with 
knowledge in both domains (with an average rating of 3.1) and SCM 
experts (with average estimates of 3.5). Moreover, the assessments of 
impact and desirability of Projection 15 (cryptocurrencies) indicate 
significant differences between the opinions of experts with experience 
in blockchain technology and those with expertise in both domains. In 
contrast to the estimates of blockchain experts, experts with expertise in 
both domains predict a lower impact on the industry if cryptocurrencies 
were to serve as a standard means of payment for business-to-business 
transactions (3.0 compared to 3.8). Additionally, the occurrence of this 
projection is rather undesirable for hybrid experts (2.7), while it is ra-
ther desirable for blockchain experts, who rated its desirability at an 
average of 3.4. 


No further significant deviations were revealed within the in-
dividual subgroup ratings. This strengthens the credibility and validity 
of the Delphi results, as the expected future of blockchain technology is 
rated similarly for the remaining dimensions and topics regardless of 
the experts’ backgrounds (Roßmann et al., 2018). 


4.2. Discussion of experts’ long-term judgments 


This Delphi study aims to picture the future landscape of blockchain 
technology utilization in SCM and thus also investigate whether the 
existing barriers, currently faced by the technology will be overcome by 
2035. The investigation was guided by the following research question: 
What application scenarios and potentials of blockchain technology are 
likely to be seen in supply chain management by 2035? Matching the 
experts’ assessments of probability and impact for each projection 
provides the first insights regarding the experts’ opinions on this issue 
(see Fig. 2). The subsequent analysis of the experts’ qualitative com-
ments is divided into three separate parts, as circled in Fig. 2, and will 
explain the respondents’ assessments in more detail. 


4.2.1. Qualitative analysis of high-probability projections 
In order to picture the landscape of blockchain technology utiliza-


tion in SCM by the year 2035, the projections with the highest prob-
ability of occurrence should be emphasized first of all. Combining them 
creates a high-probability scenario. Fig. 2 shows that seven projections 
share an expected probability of occurrence of over 60%, making them 
likely to occur within the investigated horizon. As all these projections, 
with the exception of Projection 10, have also been rated high in terms 
of their impact (≥ 3.8), they are the ones that will shape future 
blockchain-related SCM to a high degree. 


Technological barriers: With an expected probability of occurrence of 
72%, the second highest in the sample, experts assume that the tech-
nological problems that are currently discussed in literature, such as 
scalability issues (Foth, 2017; Tian, 2017; Preuveneers et al., 2017), 
high transaction times (Christidis and Devetsikiotis, 2016; Tian, 2017), 
and high power consumption (Foth, 2017; Sikorski et al., 2017), will be 
mostly resolved by 2035 (Projection 12). The experts’ anticipation is 
based on the ongoing development of new blockchain designs aimed at 


Table 4a 
Overview of significant deviations in ratings within the subgroup ”type of organization”.               


Academia Industry Politics/Associations 


No. Projection EP I D EP I D EP I D  


P1 Global legal framework 48% 4.0 3.6 58% 4.2 4.1 67% 3.9 4.0 
P5 Trust management 44% 3.6 3.3 34% 3.0 3.2 46% 3.2 3.4 
P6 Tracing material flows 56% 3.7 3.8 67% 4.1 4.2 68% 3.9 4.0 
P12 Technological barriers 71% 4.3 4.8 74% 3.8 4.4 72% 3.9 4.1 


Note: EP: Expected probability; I: Impact; D: Desirability. 
Statistically significant deviations marked in bold.  


Table 4b 
Overview of significant deviations in ratings within the subgroup ”professional 
background”.               


SCM IT SCM/IT 


No. Projection EP I D EP I D EP I D  


P14 Integrated blockchain 36% 3.6 3.5 34% 3.5 2.5 31% 3.5 3.1 
P15 Cryptocurrencies 37% 3.6 2.9 51% 3.8 2.4 41% 3.0 2.7 


Note: EP: Expected probability; I: Impact; D: Desirability. 
Statistically significant deviations marked in bold.  


M. Kopyto, et al.   










solving major technological problems. Through improved algorithms, 
transaction times are expected to be reduced, scalability to be enabled, 
and thus less power to be consumed. The Delphi panelists argue that 
overcoming the current technological barriers will enable the wide-
spread use of blockchain technology in SCM, which is quantified by a 
high impact rate of 4.1 on the 5-point Likert scale. 


Tracing material flows: One exemplary use case is its application for 
tracing product paths along a supply chain. From a technological per-
spective, blockchain technology is expected to be capable of providing 
end-to-end transparency due to the secure and trustworthy exchange of 
data. Referring to their own companies, some experts report that initial 
projects have already been realized. The majority of panelists describe 
the immutability of blockchain data as the main factor that makes the 
technology suitable for tracing applications and predict a substantially 
more extensive use by the year 2035. However, even though the experts 
agree on its suitability for tracing products, they are uncertain as to 
whether blockchain technology will evolve into the dominant standard 
for tracing material flows (Projection 6). As it was argued by the pa-
nelists, the main challenge of tracing is not necessarily keeping the 
information saved in a database but making sure that the actual phy-
sical item is traced. Thus, blockchain is not expected to be the stand- 
alone solution to the tracing challenge, but will instead be combined 
with other technologies, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), to become 
the standard for tracing. 


Product-related information: In addition to the business-driven tra-
cing of goods, panelists expect that sharing other product-related in-
formation will become an imperative as well (Projection 9), although 
they narrowed this projection to certain data only. According to the 
panelists’ expectations, information regarding CO2 emissions, price, or 
working conditions will be exchanged via blockchains in the future, 
while supply chain parties will not be interested in sharing other kinds 
of data publicly in a blockchain – particularly confidential data, as this 
would involve revealing business secrets. Consequently, the experts 
stress the challenges of smart access rights and data security that need 
to be resolved at the outset to ensure that data is accessible for the 
desired party only. Some panelists stated that the exchange of the 
above-mentioned data is mainly driven by societal pressure and not the 
intrinsic motivation of organizations. Even though blockchains would 
technologically be capable of providing absolute end-to-end transpar-
ency, due to the above reasons it is expected that blockchain technology 
will only create selected transparency within multi-tier supply networks 


(Projection 4). The panelists additionally justified their estimation by 
arguing that the integration of companies from the least developed 
countries and of firms in remote areas are expected to be particularly 
difficult, as these companies are unlikely to possess the necessary re-
sources and knowhow to implement blockchain technology, at least in 
the short term. 


Smart contracts: The highest contribution for efficiency improve-
ments is attributed to smart contracts, as they enable the automation of 
supply chain processes. Due to the potential benefits of smart contracts 
– such as the guarantee of contract enforcement, the connection of 
unknown or untrusted parties, accuracy and efficiency gains, and cost 
savings – industries are assumed by the Delphi panelists to strive for 
their implementation. The disruptive character of smart contracts is 
also underpinned by the experts' high assessment of their impact for 
SCM (4.3), which is rated highest when compared to all other projec-
tions in this study. An increasing flexibility regarding human interac-
tion when things do not go as planned and the resolution of smart 
contracts’ security problems are expected to further increase their uti-
lization. Thus, the majority of experts estimate that operational tasks 
will have been largely replaced by smart contracts by the year 2035 
(Projection 3). Nevertheless, some barriers for their application are also 
predicted. Some experts believe that the world is too complex to 
translate the underlying processes into algorithms, which is why non- 
standard supply chain tasks are not expected to be automated. Smart 
contracts are also expected to be implemented at different speeds, with 
companies from developed countries implementing them more rapidly 
than those from developing countries, the reasons being the higher fi-
nancial and human capital resources of the former. This inequality, say 
the experts, will limit the broad realization of global supply chain au-
tomation in the short run. 


Risk management: In addition to smart contracts, another lever to 
increase supply chain efficiency is the enhancement of supply chain risk 
management. This has recently gained in relevance, as globalization not 
only triggers global competition but also increases the vulnerability of 
supply chains due to their increasing complexity (Ferdows et al., 2016;  
Vilko et al., 2014). According to this study's interviewees, there is a 
70% probability that the use of blockchain technology will fundamen-
tally improve supply chain risk management by 2035 (Projection 11). 
An interquartile range of 20 further indicates that there is a strong 
consensus among panelists on this issue. As data shared within a 
blockchain is usually more reliable, because it cannot be altered 


Fig. 2. Classification of projections based on expected probability and expected impact.  


M. Kopyto, et al.   






























retrospectively, the majority of panelists foresee advantages for supply 
chain risk management through the technology's utilization. It is as-
sumed that the resulting gapless stream of supply chain data will lead to 
increased transparency of supply chain processes. Due to the increased 
transparency, supply chain risks can be handled proactively, and supply 
chain interruptions can be identified and dealt with faster, increasing 
the overall resilience of supply chains. The strong reliability of data is 
also expected to lead to better anticipation and risk assessments. Con-
sequently, all three supply chain risk management phases – identifica-
tion, assessment, and management of risks – are assumed to be posi-
tively influenced through the availability of blockchain data. Even 
though the majority of experts agree on the potential of blockchain 
technology for supply chain risk management, a few also stated that not 
all types of risk (e.g., natural hazards) can be better managed with 
blockchain technology, and that this will not change by 2035. Ad-
ditionally, new risks, especially information security and privacy risks, 
might occur through the application of blockchain technology. 


Job profiles: When focusing on the human factor in SCM, experts 
confirm that the utilization of blockchain technology will require new 
skills in SCM departments (Projection 10). Within this study, it was 
rated as the projection with the highest probability of occurrence 
(73%). In particular, the need for skills related to IT and legal issues is 
assumed to increase. Experts agree that increasing IT knowhow is re-
quired for the implementation of contract-to-real-world interfaces and 
for understanding the applicability of blockchain technology for supply 
chain practices. There is an additional need for specialized experts with 
expertise in planning, development, integration, operation, controlling, 
and management of blockchain systems. Legal counseling in SCM will 
also change due to blockchain technology, as new aspects, such as the 
development of smarts contracts, will have to be considered. 
Furthermore, new auditing jobs focusing on the validity of incoming 
data will be generated, and new skills will be required to integrate 
supply chain partners. Due to the newly required job profiles, it is as-
sumed that a highly specialized workforce will be needed in SCM, 
leading to a shortfall in expertise and corresponding re-skilling efforts 
within companies. Surprisingly, the impact of this projection was rated 
relatively low (3.5) compared to other projections (see Table 3), which 
could be explained by the fact that job profiles are changing con-
tinuously, especially due to the ongoing digitalization. Notwith-
standing, investments should include a budget for re-skilling in order to 
ensure that the workforce is qualified for its new tasks. Overall, the 
experts’ discussion reveals that the job-related barriers listed in the 
literature (Partida, 2018; Shanley, 2017) may challenge the im-
plementation of blockchain technology in the short term, but they are 
not expected to hinder its broad implementation in SCM in the future. 


4.2.2. Qualitative analysis of medium-probability projections 
The second set under investigation bundles projections whose 


probability assessments concentrate in the narrow window of 54-56% 
(see Fig. 2). All four projections are characterized by large interquartile 
ranges, indicating a high degree of disagreement among experts. 
Nevertheless, although the experts were not in agreement and their 
assessments do not show any tendency toward a high or low probability 
of occurrence, their comments reveal essential points that may influ-
ence the future landscape of blockchain technology utilization in SCM. 


Global legal framework: Regarding a global legal framework for the 
application of blockchain technology in SCM, experts have differing 
opinions on how regulations will be configured by the year 2035 
(Projection 1). Many experts stated that the global alignment of reg-
ulatory agreements is difficult due to complex national and interna-
tional laws and regulations (e.g., tax and trade agreements) along with 
different economic systems and cultures. Thus, blockchain technology 
is not expected to be important enough to justify the enormous effort of 
developing and agreeing on a universal international law. Others expect 
that there will be legal agreements between certain countries only or 
general frameworks that guide countries to develop comparable legal 


constructs. Other experts believe that existing regulations and laws only 
require slight adaptations, if any at all, to use blockchains in globally 
connected supply chain networks. One panelist stated that, when 
technology evolves, smart contracts could also be fully recognized as 
law. 


Regardless of the stated dissent on how regulations will be config-
ured in the future, all statements reveal that regulations are expected to 
be necessary for a broad implementation of blockchain technology in 
SCM, which is why the impact of this projection was rated one of the 
highest (4.0). According to the experts, these regulations do not have to 
be international, as companies and involved countries will find ways to 
regulate the application of blockchain technology by themselves. This 
will be the standard approach, especially for private or consortium 
blockchains, which only consist of a limited number of members. 
Guided by their respective country-specific legal laws and data pro-
tection regulations, member organizations will regulate the application 
of blockchains individually. Altogether, the panelists’ comments re-
vealed that legal issues are not expected to constitute a critical barrier 
to blockchain's implementation in SCM in the future. Furthermore, it 
can be concluded that, even though experts are still divided over the 
exact configuration of blockchain regulations, they agree that regula-
tions will be established in the future. This is in line with the study by  
Schweizer et al. (2020), where experts predicted a legal framework for 
blockchain applications within the European Union by the year 2028. 


Digital interconnection: In addition to the experts’ differing opinions 
on the probability and nature of a global legal framework by the year 
2035, they are also are divided on blockchains role as a key trigger for 
an IoT connected digital world (Projection 8), its ability to improve 
companies’ demand planning capabilities (Projection 7), or companies’ 
compliance with sustainability standards (Projection 2). 


As the panelists stated, the use of blockchain technology will foster 
the expansion of the IoT, especially as they foresee new solutions and 
innovations regarding process automation; however, it will not act as 
the key trigger. According to their argument, objects and devices may 
be digitally connected by other technologies as well. Nevertheless, it is 
also expected that by the year 2035, new business models combining 
blockchain technology and IoT will be established. 


Demand planning: In regard to Projection 7, the analysis revealed 
that combining open access blockchain data and big data analytics 
might have the potential to improve demand planning through the 
provision of detailed insights into demand patterns. However, some 
experts stated that not all demand factors are contained in blockchain 
data (e.g., weather data) and that cybersecurity and privacy concerns 
are additional barriers for data availability that will still exist in 2035. 
Overall, other technologies, such as artificial intelligence and big data 
analytics, are predicted to have a more significant impact on the im-
provement of demand forecasts. 


Sustainability standards: Through the improved transparency trig-
gered by the utilization of blockchain technology in SCM, organiza-
tions’ incentives to provide high-quality products through sustainable 
working practices are predicted to increase (Projection 2). However, 
with regard to accountability, it is mentioned that, even though 
blockchain technology can prevent the manipulation of data that has 
already been written into the blockchain, the authenticity of data inputs 
cannot be ensured. To solve this issue in the context of sustainability, 
physical evidence (e.g., working conditions, use of toxic material, etc.) 
would have to be securely transferable into digital information, which 
is currently described by experts as a bottleneck. Since no complete and 
globally applicable solutions are expected in this regard by 2035, it is 
assumed that future compliance with sustainability standards will be 
ensured and reported by traditional means and selective blockchain- 
based support in parallel. 


4.2.3. Qualitative analysis of low-probability projections 
The remaining four projections were evaluated with a probability of 


occurrence of less than 50% (see Fig. 4); nevertheless, they do provide 


M. Kopyto, et al.   














valuable insights regarding the future utilization of blockchain tech-
nology in SCM. The discussion of these issues reveals a variety of 
shortcomings and barriers that still need to be addressed and further 
indicates under which circumstances the Delphi panelists expect 
blockchain technology to be used by the year 2035. 


Trust management: As the creation of trust is mentioned as one of the 
most promising advantages of blockchain technology in the literature 
(Weber et al., 2016; Nakasumi, 2017), it is surprising that the experts 
relativize the predictions that blockchain technology will con-
comitantly increase trust levels between SCM partners. Their assess-
ment is based on the fact that SCM differs in one important char-
acteristic from other areas such as finance, where trust between 
business partners can be increased by using blockchains – namely, the 
link with the physical world. The qualitative analysis of Projection 5 
(trust management) reveals that experts agree unanimously on block-
chains’ ability to increase trust for solely digital transactions, but at the 
same time they are concerned that data might be manipulated before it 
is entered into the blockchain. While the use of blockchains can foster 
trust in certain business processes, experts believe that this is not en-
sured across the entire inter-organizational SCM process chain. Thus, 
active trust management (Projection 5) is not expected to be replaced 
by blockchain technology by the year 2035, but rather to change its 
focus, as only some areas of trust management, including financial 
monitoring or tactical-spend related topics, might be completely sup-
ported by blockchain technology. Areas such as tracing of goods or the 
tracking of quality and social standards will stay vulnerable to data 
entry manipulation. Due to this fact, interpersonal relationships and the 
therewith associated high trust level are expected to be areas particu-
larly relevant in encouraging supply chain partners to share data and in 
ensuring the authenticity of data entered into the blockchain. This risk 
of fraud when entering data from the physical world into a blockchain 
led the experts in this study to regard lack of trust as a barrier for 
blockchain implementation in SCM. To overcome this barrier, active 
trust management is needed, which is why losing its relevance only 
shows a low rate of desirability (3.3). 


Data manipulation: Information security was mentioned by the ex-
perts as a barrier for the implementation of blockchain technology in 
SCM. This may be counterintuitive, as data immutability is a design 
feature of the technology and one of the key reasons for its im-
plementation. In the context of this study, experts agree that the ma-
nipulation of data written in the blockchain will most probably not be 
possible by the year 2035, as cybersecurity is expected to improve with 
the massive adoption of the technology (Projection 13). Nonetheless, as 
long as businesses are concerned that data might be manipulated before 
it is entered into the blockchain, blockchain's security advantage as 
proposed in the literature cannot be fully exploited in SCM. Based on 
the analysis of Projections 5 and 13, it can be concluded that, in com-
parison to other branches such as finance, active trust management is a 
factor that could help to overcome these barriers and therefore is a 
necessary factor for the successful implementation of blockchains in 
SCM. Even though blockchain technology is evaluated as beneficial to 
increasing transparency and improving supply chain efficiency, the 
SCM-specific barriers related to data availability and data authenticity 
are regarded as critical for the exploitation of blockchain's full poten-
tial. 


Integrated blockchain: Projection 14 focused on the interoperability 
of blockchains, as the three trends of an increasing number of public 
blockchain ecosystems, a growing variety of blockchain applications, 
and the development toward private, company-owned blockchains 
were discussed in the literature as technologically challenging for the 
implementation of blockchain technology in SCM, raising the question 
of inter-blockchain data exchange. Despite the increasingly fragmented 
blockchain landscape, to exploit the full potential of this technology, 
blockchains should be integrated in such a way that, for example, a 
transaction on Hyperledger can retrieve information from Ethereum. In 
an SCM context, paying a supplier via one blockchain that first requires 


additional data from another blockchain to approve the transaction is 
an apt example. Nevertheless, according to the majority of experts, 
standardization of blockchain applications is not a preferred solution to 
tackling this challenge. Thus, an integrated multi-purpose blockchain 
that combines the features, abilities, and application areas (e.g., fi-
nancial transactions, tracing of goods, quality control) of several spe-
cialized, task-specific blockchains into one comprehensive blockchain 
and operates as a standardized one-size-fits-all solution, is neither de-
sired (2.8) nor expected (33%) (Projection 14). Instead, an integrated 
blockchain solution is evaluated as a threat to democracy, personal 
freedom, as well as innovation, and is assumed to represent a target for 
all kinds of criminal and terrorist actions. Furthermore, it is expected to 
be too complex and too energy-consuming due to the high number of 
network partners. Application-specific and sector-specific requirements 
will also not be covered in one single blockchain. Consequently, mul-
tiple task-specific blockchains are expected to co-exist in the future, 
regardless of whether they are organized as public, private, or con-
sortium blockchains. As the need for pooling the various data of such 
specialized blockchains increases, experts assume that in the year 2035, 
exchanging data will be facilitated by virtual platforms. These plat-
forms would interlink different blockchains via parent/child relation-
ships in such a way that specialized blockchains – so-called sub- 
blockchains – would be docked to these platforms, creating a network 
of networks that allows different blockchains to communicate with each 
other. According to the experts, even though the standardization of 
blockchains might not be realized in the future, there will be suitable 
ways to connect the increasing number of blockchains in order to ex-
ploit the technology's full potential. It can thus be concluded that the 
technological problem of interoperability stated in the literature 
(Underwood, 2016) is not expected to be a barrier for the im-
plementation of blockchains in SCM in the future. 


Cryptocurrencies: In addition to the interoperability of blockchains, 
the introduction of cryptocurrencies as the standard means of payment 
for business-to-business transactions (Projection 15) is discussed by the 
literature as another possibility for reducing transaction costs in SCM. 
Although cryptocurrencies are expected to lower costs, speed up 
transactions, and lead to promising use cases in combination with smart 
contracts, the experts’ assessments suggest a divisive situation. Practical 
hurdles and barriers predominated the experts’ evaluations. Lack of 
governmental control, being one of cryptocurrency's potential ad-
vantages, as well as confidentiality issues and volatility, are stated as 
serious drawbacks. Hence, some experts assume that only if crypto-
currency evolves and is controlled by a central bank, or if fiat money 
becomes available in crypto form, will there be a chance that it will 
become the standard means of payment for business-to-business 
transactions until the year 2035. With regard to this opinion, it is also 
mentioned that cryptocurrencies are not necessarily required as the 
means of payment for financial, blockchain-secured business-to-busi-
ness transactions, and the technical features of a blockchain could 
therefore be used without the uncertainties associated with a crypto-
currency. 


4.3. Implications for practice and future research 


The analysis of the projections on the basis of their probability of 
occurrence and expected impact reveals which scenarios could arise for 
the future application of blockchains in SCM and also reveals which 
combined projections represent the highest-probability scenario. This 
outlook will be of great value to researchers and managers alike, 
especially as the quantitative results confirmed a high relevance for all 
projections under investigation (indicated by an impact of 3.3 or 
higher). 


As this study looks ahead to the year 2035, it can support businesses 
in their long-term strategic decisions, with the scenario data acting as a 
starting point for long-term blockchain-related efforts. The derived 
implications are valuable as guiding principles for the development of 


M. Kopyto, et al.   






new strategies as well as reassessing existing ones. For example, man-
agers should not solely look at the technological aspects of blockchain 
solutions, as most technological barriers such as high energy con-
sumption or transaction times are expected to be solved in the long run. 
Rather, they need to focus on a secure and thorough integration of 
supply chain partners into the blockchain network. Organizations must 
pay particular attention to the interface between the physical world and 
the blockchain to ensure that the data fed into the system is correct. 
Incorrect data has a negative impact on the application of smart con-
tracts and product tracing, hampers the success of risk management 
activities, and reduces trust in sustainability tracking. As long as the 
secure import of data is not guaranteed, trust management should be 
further expanded by the organizations, even though the literature and 
general expectations consider blockchain technology to be trust- 
building. Regarding the legal aspects relating to the application of 
blockchains in SCM, there was significant disagreement among experts 
on whether a global legal framework will be established, and conse-
quently – especially when operating private or consortium blockchains 
that only consist of a limited number of members – organizations 
should also think about legal aspects. Furthermore, the experts were 
confident that job profiles in SCM will change or will be newly created 
due to blockchain technology. As a highly specialized workforce is 
therefore anticipated, companies should ensure that the necessary 
personnel are hired and also take early action to initiate the required re- 
skilling. 


From a theoretical point of view, the study reveals areas for future 
research. In line with other studies (Abeyratne and Monfared, 2016;  
Kshetri, 2018; O'Leary, 2017; Bumblauskas et al., 2020), this research 
supports the idea that blockchain technology has the potential to in-
crease transparency and improve efficiency in supply chains. The fu-
ture-oriented approach of the underlying study, however, revealed that 
SCM-specific barriers related to data availability and data authenticity 
can be regarded as critical for the exploitation of blockchain's full po-
tential. Therefore, procedures and mechanisms for a secure and tamper- 
proof transfer of information about physical transactions into digital 
data need to be conceptually developed and tested in practice. The 
results of this study also suggest that further research is needed on how 
to combine blockchains with other technologies, for example the IoT or 
Cyber Physical Systems – to increase the blockchain's value for tracing 
(Projection 6). Moreover, as smart contracts (Projection 3) have been 
rated as the application with the highest impact for SCM, the operation 
of smart contracts in SCM should be addressed more in future research. 
Further research should also be carried out on the contrasting assess-
ments of the projections given by experts from academia, industry, and 
politics/associations. For example, the estimations of academics and 
industry experts differ significantly on the probability of Projection 6 
(tracing material flows) (56% compared to 67%) and the impact of 
Projection 5 (trust management) (3.6 compared to 3.0), which leads to 
the question of why such large differences of opinion exist. It should 
also be noted that some projections were discussed and evaluated very 
controversially, which resulted in a lack of consensus in the experts’ 
opinions (e.g., Projection 1). Future research projects should therefore 
examine these projections in greater detail. 


5. Conclusion 


A blockchain, sometimes referred to as distributed ledger tech-
nology, records the history of transactions between networked actors in 
an immutable and decentralized manner; and even though a blockchain 
has further attributes, these characteristics already indicate the poten-
tial of the technology for SCM. In a supply chain context, blockchain 
technology is often attributed to improvements in transparency, trust, 
efficiency, accountability, or cost reduction (Casino et al., 2019;  
Kshetri, 2018; O'Leary, 2017; Yong et al., 2020). However, since re-
search on blockchain technology in the field of SCM is still in its early 
stages and highly theoretical, there is a call for additional empirical 


research to better understand its potential, implementation processes, 
and future application areas (Wamba and Queiroz, 2020). This research 
paper therefore applies a real-time Delphi methodology to gather pro-
found long-term judgments of an international expert panel on how 
blockchain technology will influence the future of SCM and to identify 
potential application scenarios for the year 2035. In contrast to existing 
scientific papers on blockchain technology in SCM, it does not only 
consider the technical perspective, but regards policy, economics, and 
societal aspects, taking a multi-level perspective, as these factors also 
affect technology transition. Moreover, it involves experts with het-
erogeneous backgrounds, providing a holistic picture of blockchain's 
future in SCM. The study developed and discussed projections that have 
been rated by the Delphi panelists according to their probability of 
occurrence, impact, and desirability. 


Through the analysis of the experts’ long-term judgments, and in 
accordance with existing literature, transparency and efficiency are 
confirmed as the main benefits of blockchain's utilization in SCM. 
Moreover, the highest-ranked projections in regard to their probability 
have been combined in a scenario, which is likely to occur within the 
investigated horizon, offering businesses a validated starting point for 
their blockchain strategies. The study further identifies data availability 
and data authenticity as two major SCM-specific barriers that could 
prevent the exploitation of potential benefits. These barriers indicate 
that two of blockchain's promising advantages – namely manipulation 
safety and negligibility of trust – are not entirely transferable to SCM 
without additional conditions, as the authenticity of data entered into a 
blockchain cannot be guaranteed. This is because SCM not only deals 
with digital transactions, but also with physical ones that have to be 
transferred into digital information. However, the transfer process is 
prone to manipulation, and thus manipulated data could be entered 
into the blockchain. Ensuring the transmission of truthful data into the 
blockchain is therefore a crucial prerequisite for increasing the level of 
trust and for ensuring the accuracy of all related applications, including 
smart contracting or tracing of goods. Consequently, this study adds to 
the existing literature by revealing that trust among business partners in 
SCM will not be replaced by cryptographic proof alone, but that active 
trust management at the interface between the physical and digital 
worlds of SCM acts as the enabler. In summary, the research contributes 
to the transfer of general technical-driven blockchain knowledge to 
SCM-specific blockchain knowledge, which is essential, as technology 
transition does not depend on technological aspects alone 
(Geels, 2002). 


As with any research, the study at hand has limitations, which 
provide opportunities for future research. Although a systematic pro-
cess was followed to develop the projections involving political, eco-
nomic, social, and technological aspects, the number of projections was 
limited to 15 to ensure an appropriate survey-processing time and to 
reduce drop-off rates. There is therefore scope for further research, in 
which aspects that were not explicitly considered in this Delphi study 
could be assessed. 


CRediT authorship contribution statement 


Matthias Kopyto: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, 
Project administration. Sabrina Lechler: Conceptualization, 
Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft. 
Heiko A. von der Gracht: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - 
original draft, Writing - review & editing. Evi Hartmann: Methodology, 
Validation, Writing - original draft. 


References 


Abeyratne, S.A., Monfared, R.P., 2016. Blockchain ready manufacturing supply chain 
using distributed ledger. Int. J. Res. Eng. Technol. 5 (9), 1–10. 


Aengenheyster, S., Cuhls, K., Gerhold, L., Heiskanen-Schüttler, M., Huck, J., Muszynska, 


M. Kopyto, et al.   







http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0001




M., 2017. Real-time Delphi in practice – a comparative analysis of existing software- 
based tools. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 118, 15–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2017.01.023. 


Ahram, T., Sargolzaei, A., Sargolzaei, S., Daniels, J., Amaba, B., 2017. “Blockchain 
technology innovations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Technology and Engineering 
Management Conference (TEMSCON). 8–10 June, Santa Clara, USA. 


Alangot, B., Achuthan, K., 2017. Trace and track. Enhanced pharma supply chain infra-
structure to prevent fraud. In: Kumar, N., Thakre, A. (Eds.), Ubiquitous 
Communications and Network Computing: First International Conference. Springer, 
Cham, pp. 189–195. 


Ammous, S. (2016), “Blockchain technology. What is it good for?”, available at: https:// 
ssrn.com/abstract=2832751 (accessed 23 March 2020). 


Armstrong, S.J., Overton, T.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys. J. 
Mark. Res. 14 (3), 396–402. 


Banker, S. (2018), “The growing maturity of blockchain for supply chain management”, 
available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevebanker/2018/02/22/the-growing- 
maturity-of-blockchain-for-supply-chain-management/#6aba532e11da (accessed 23 
March 2020). 


Beck, R., Mueller-Bloch, C., 2017. “Blockchain as radical innovation. A framework for 
engaging with distributed ledgers”. In: Proceedings of the Fiftieth Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 4–7 Jan, Waikoloa, Hawaii. 


Best, R.J., 1974. An experiment in Delphi estimation in marketing decision making. J. 
Mark. Res. 11 (4), 448–452. 


Bocek, T., Rodrigues, B.B., Strasser, T., Stiller, B., 2017. Blockchains everywhere. A use- 
case of Blockchains in the pharma supply-chain. In: Proceedings of the IFIP/IEEE 
Symposium on Integrated Network and Service Management (IM). 8–12 May, Lisbon, 
Portugal. 


Bogart, S., Rice, K., 2015. The Blockchain Report: Welcome to the Internet of Value. 
Needham Insights. 


Borioli, G.S., Couturier, J., 2018. How blockchain technology can improve the outcomes 
of clinical trials. Br. J. Healthc. Manag. 24 (3), 156–162. https://doi.org/10.12968/ 
bjhc.2018.24.3.156. 


Bumblauskas, D., Mann, A., Dugan, B., Rittmer, J., 2020. A blockchain use case in food 
distribution: do you know where your food has been? Int. J. Inf. Manag. 52, 102008. 


Casey, M.J., Wong, P., 2017. Global supply chains are about to get better, thanks to 
blockchain. Harvard Bus. Rev. 13, 2–6. 


Casino, F., Dasaklis, T.K., Patsakis, C., 2019. A systematic literature review of blockchain- 
based applications: current status, classification and open issues. Telem. Inform. 36, 
55–81. 


Chen, S., Shi, R., Ren, Z., Yan, J., Shi, Y., Zhang, J., 2017. A blockchain-based supply 
chain quality management framework. In: Hussain, O. (Ed.), Proceedings of The 
Fourteenth IEEE International Conference on e-Business Engineering. IEEE, 
Piscataway, NJ, pp. 172–176. 


Christidis, K., Devetsikiotis, M., 2016. Blockchains and smart contracts for the internet of 
things. IEEE Access 4, 2292–2303. 


Christopher, M., Towill, D., 2001. An integrated model for the design of agile supply 
chains. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Log. Manag. 31 (4), 235–246. 


CoinMarketCap, 2020. Total market capitalization crypotcurrencies.  available at: 
https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/ (accessed 23 March 2020). 


Collomb, A., Sok, K., 2016. Blockchain/Distributed ledger technology (DLT): what impact 
on the financial sector? Commun. Strat. 103, 93–111. 


Crosby, M., Nachiappan, Pattanayak, P., Verma, S., Kalyanaraman, V., 2016. Blockchain 
technology. Beyond bitcoin. Appl. Innov. Rev. 2, 6–19. 


Dalkey, Norman Crolee, 1967. Delphi. Delphi. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, 
California Santa Monica, California. 


Dalkey, N., Helmer, O., 1963. An Experimental application of the DELPHI method to the 
use of experts. Manag. Sci. 9 (3), 458–467. 


Diamond, I.R., Grant, R.C., Feldman, B.M., Pencharz, P.B., Ling, S.C., Moore, A.M., Wales, 
P.W., 2014. Defining consensus. A systematic review recommends methodologic 
criteria for reporting of Delphi studies. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 67 (4), 401–409. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.12.002. 


Dinwoodie, J., Landamore, M., Rigot-Muller, P., 2014. Dry bulk shipping flows to 2050: 
Delphi perceptions of early career specialists. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 88, 
64–75. 


Dunn, W.N., 2004. Public Policy Analysis: An Introduction, 3rd ed. Pearson Prentice Hall. 
Ecken, P., Gnatzy, T., von der Gracht, H.A., 2011. Desirability bias in foresight. 


Consequences for decision quality based on Delphi results. Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change 78 (9), 1654–1670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.05.006. 


Ferdows, K., Vereecke, A., Meyer, A.de, 2016. Delayering the global production network 
into congruent subnetworks. J. Oper. Manag. 41 (1), 63–74. 


Foerster, B., von der Gracht, H.A., 2014. Assessing Delphi panel composition for strategic 
foresight. A comparison of panels based on company-internal and external partici-
pants. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 84, 215–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2013.07.012. 


Foth, M., 2017. The promise of blockchain technology for interaction design. In: Soro, A. 
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 29th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference. 
The Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, pp. 513–517. 


Fritschy, C., Spinler, S., 2019. The impact of autonomous trucks on business models in the 
automotive and logistics industry–a Delphi-based scenario study. Technol. Forecast. 
Soc. Change 148. 


Gao, Z., Xu, L., Chen, L., Zhao, X., Lu, Y., Shi, W., 2018. CoC. A unified distributed ledger 
based supply chain management system. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 33 (2), 237–248. 


Garrett, R., 2017. How blockchain is transforming the supply chain. Supply Demand 
Chain Execut. 18 (2), 10–14. 


Gausemeier, J., Fink, A., Schlake, O., 1998. Scenario management: an approach to de-
velop future potentials. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 59 (2), 111–130. 


Geels, F.W., 2002. Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes. A 
multi-level perspective and a case-study. Res. Policy 31, 1257–1274. 


Geels, F.W., 2004. From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical systems. Res. 
Policy 33 (6–7), 897–920. 


Geels, F.W., Schot, J., 2007. Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways. Res. Policy 
36 (3), 399–417. 


Geist, M.R., 2010. Using the Delphi method to engage stakeholders. A comparison of two 
studies. Eval. Program Plann. 33 (2), 147–154. 


Gnatzy, T., Warth, J., von der Gracht, H.A., Darkow, I.-L., 2011. Validating an innovative 
real-time Delphi approach – a methodological comparison between real-time and 
conventional Delphi studies. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 78 (9), 1681–1694. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.04.006. 


Gordon, T., Pease, A., 2006. RT Delphi: An efficient, "round-less" almost real time Delphi 
method. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 73 (4), 321–333. 


Graefe, A., Armstrong, J.S., 2011. Comparing face-to-face meetings, nominal groups, 
Delphi and prediction markets on an estimation task. Int. J. Forecast. 27 (1), 
183–195. 


Gray, P., Hovav, A., 2008. From hindsight to foresight: applying futures research tech-
niques in information systems. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 22, 211–234. 


Gupta, U.G., Clarke, R.E., 1996. Theory and applications of the Delphi technique: a 
bibliography (1975–1994). Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 53 (2), 185–211. 


Haughwout, J., 2018. Tracking medicine by transparent blockchain. Pharmaceut. 
Process. (January/February), 24–26. 


Hirschinger, M., Spickermann, A., Hartmann, E., von der Gracht, H.A., Darkow, I.-L., 
2015. The future of logistics in emerging markets-fuzzy clustering scenarios grounded 
in institutional and factor-market rivalry theory. J. Supply Chain Manag. 51 (4), 
73–93. https://doi.org/10.1111/jscm.12074. 


Holland, M., Nigischer, C., Stjepandic, J., 2017. Copyright protection in additive manu-
facturing with blockchain approach. Adv. Transdiscipl. Eng. 5, 914–921. 


Hsiao, J.-H., Tso, R., Chen, C.-M., Wu, M.-E., 2018. Decentralized E-voting systems based 
on the blockchain technology. In: Park, J.J., Loia, V., Yi, G., Sung, Y. (Eds.), Advances 
in Computer Science and Ubiquitous Computing, Lecture Notes in Electrical 
Engineering 474. Springer Singapore, Singapore, pp. 305–309. 


Iansiti, M., Lakhani, K.R., 2017. The truth about blockchain. Harvard Bus. Rev. 95 (1), 
118–127. 


Jiang, R., Kleer, R., Piller, F.T., 2017. Predicting the future of additive manufacturing: a 
Delphi study on economic and societal implications of 3D printing for 2030. Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Change 117, 84–97. 


Johnson, J.L., 1976. A ten-year Delphi forecast in the electronics industry. Ind. Mark. 
Manag. 5, 45–55. 


Keller, J., von der Gracht, H., 2014. The influence of information and communication 
technology (ICT) on future foresight processes – results from a Delphi survey. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 85, 81–92. 


Khan, M.A., Salah, K., 2018. IoT security. Review, blockchain solutions, and open chal-
lenges. Fut. Gener. Comput. Syst. 82, 395–411. 


Klassen, R.D., Whybark, D.C., 1994. Barriers to the management of international opera-
tions. J. Oper. Manag. (11), 385–396. 


Korpela, K., Hallikas, J., Dahlberg, T., 2017. “Digital supply chain transformation toward 
blockchain integration. In: Proceedings of the Fiftieth Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 4–7 Jan, Waikoloa, Hawaii. 


Kshetri, N., 2017a. Blockchain's roles in strengthening cybersecurity and protecting 
privacy. Telecommun. Policy 41 (10), 1027–1038. 


Kshetri, N., 2017b. Can blockchain strengthen the internet of things? IT Prof. 19 (4), 
68–72. 


Kshetri, N., 2018. 1 Blockchain's roles in meeting key supply chain management objec-
tives. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 39, 80–89. 


Kurpjuweit, S., Schmidt, C.G., Klöckner, M., Wagner, S.M., 2019. Blockchain in additive 
manufacturing and its impact on supply chains. J. Bus. Logist. 1–25. 


Landeta, J., 2006. Current validity of the Delphi method in social sciences. Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Change 73 (5), 467–482. 


Lee, J.-H., Pilkington, M., 2017. How the blockchain revolution will reshape the con-
sumer electronics industry. IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag. 6 (3), 19–23. 


Liao, C.-F., Bao, S.-W., Cheng, C.-J., Chen, K., 2017. “On design issues and architectural 
styles for blockchain-driven IoT services. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Consumer Electronics. 12–14 June, Taipei, Taiwan. 


Linstone, H.A., Turoff, M., 1975. The Delphi Method: Techniques and applications. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing, Boston, MA. 


Loop, P., 2016. Blockchain. The next evolution of supply chains. Mater. Handl. Logist. 71 
(10), 22–24. 


Loveridge, D., 2002. On Delphi Quesions (No. 31). The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK. 


Lu, Q., Xu, X., 2017. Adaptable blockchain-based systems. A case study for product tra-
ceability. IEEE Softw. 34 (6), 21–27. 


Mackey, T.K., Nayyar, G., 2017. A review of existing and emerging digital technologies to 
combat the global trade in fake medicines. Exp. Opin. Drug Saf. 16 (5), 587–602. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14740338.2017.1313227. 


Madhwal, Y., Panfilov, P., 2017. Blockchain and supply chain management. Aircrafts’ 
parts’ business case. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth International DAAAM 
Symposium. 8–11 Nov, Zadar, Croatia. 


Markmann, C., Spickermann, A., Von Der Gracht, H., Brem, A., 2020. Improving the 
question formulation in Delphi-like surveys: Analysis of the effects of abstract lan-
guage and amount of information on response behavior. Futures & Foresight Science 
e56. https://doi.org/10.1002/ffo2.56. 


Melander, L., Dubois, A., Hedvall, K., Lind, F., 2019. Future goods transport in Sweden 
2050: using a Delphi-based scenario analysis. Technol. Forecast. Social Change 138, 
178–189. 


Mettler, M., 2016. “Blockchain technology in healthcare. The revolution starts here”. In: 
Proceedings of the IEEE Eighteenth International Conference on e-Health 
Networking. 14–17 Sep, Munich, Germany. Applications and Services (Healthcom). 


Mitchell, V., 1996. Assessing the reliability and validity of questionnaires: an empirical 
example. J. Appl. Manag. Stud. 5 (2), 199–208. 


Morabito, V., 2017. Business Innovation through Blockchain: The B3 Perspective. 
Springer, Cham. 


Müßigmann, B., von der Gracht, H.A., Hartmann, E., 2020. Blockchain technology in 


M. Kopyto, et al.   



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.01.023

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.01.023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0004

https://ssrn.com/abstract=2832751

https://ssrn.com/abstract=2832751

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0006

https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevebanker/2018/02/22/the-growing-maturity-of-blockchain-for-supply-chain-management/#6aba532e11da

https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevebanker/2018/02/22/the-growing-maturity-of-blockchain-for-supply-chain-management/#6aba532e11da

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0009

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0009

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0011

https://doi.org/10.12968/bjhc.2018.24.3.156

https://doi.org/10.12968/bjhc.2018.24.3.156

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0018

https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0021

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0022

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0022

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0023

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.12.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.12.002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0026

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.05.006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0028

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0028

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.07.012

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.07.012

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0032

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0032

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0033

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0037

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0038

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0038

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.04.006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0044

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0044

https://doi.org/10.1111/jscm.12074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0046

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0046

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0048

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0048

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0051

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0053

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0053

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0056

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0056

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0058

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0061

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0061

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0061

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0062

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0062

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0063

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0063

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0064

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0064

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0065

https://doi.org/10.1080/14740338.2017.1313227

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0067

https://doi.org/10.1002/ffo2.56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0068

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0068

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0068

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0069

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0069

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0069

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0071

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0071




logistics and supply chain management—A bibliometric literature review from 2016 
to january 2020. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020. 
2980733. 


Nakamoto, S. (2008), “Bitcoin. A peer-to-peer electronic cash system”, available at: 
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (accessed 23 March 2020). 


Nakasumi, M., 2017. Information sharing for supply chain management based on block 
chain technology. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Nineteenth Conference on Business 
Informatics (CBI). 24-27 July, Thessaloniki, Greece. 


Ogden, J.A., Petersen, K.J., Carter, J.R., Monczka, R.M., 2005. Supply chain management 
strategies for the future. A Delphi study. J. Supply Chain Manag. 41 (3), 29–48. 


Okoli, C., Pawlowski, S.D., 2004. The Delphi method as a research tool: an example, 
design considerations and applications. Inf. Manag. 42 (1), 15–29. 


O'Leary, D.E., 2017. Configuring blockchain architectures for transaction information in 
blockchain consortiums: the case of accounting and supply chain systems. Intel. Syst. 
Acc. Financ. Manag. 24 (4), 138–147. 


Parenté, F.J., Anderson-Parenté, J.K., 1987. Delphi inquiry systems. In: Wright, G., Ayton, 
P. (Eds.), Judgemental Forecasting. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 129–156. 


Parenté, R.J., Anderson-Parenté, J.K., 2011. A case study of long-term Delphi accuracy. 
Technol. Forecast. Social Change 78 (9), 1705–1711. 


Partida, B., 2018. Blockchain's great potential. Supply Chain Manag. Rev. 22 (4), 24–25. 
Phadnis, S.S., 2019. Effectiveness of Delphi- and scenario planning-like processes in en-


abling organizational adaptation: a simulation-based comparison. Fut. Foresight Sci. 
1 (2), e9. https://doi.org/10.1002/ffo2.9. 


Pilkington, M., 2016. Blockchain Technology: Principles and Applications. Research 
Handbook on Digital Transformations. Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 225–253. 


Polim, R., Hu, Q., Kumara, S., 2017. Blockchain in megacity logistics. In: Coperich, K., 
Cudney, E., Nembhard, H.B. (Eds.), Industrial and Systems Engineering Conference. 
Curran Associates Inc, Red Hook, NY, pp. 1589–1594. 


Preuveneers, D., Joosen, W., Ilie-Zudor, E., 2017. Trustworthy data-driven networked 
production for customer-centric plants. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 117 (10), 2305–2324. 


Rikkonen, P., Tapio, P., 2009. Future prospects of alternative agro-based bioenergy use in 
Finland-Constructing scenarios with quantitative and qualitative Delphi data. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 76 (7), 978–990. 


Riley, S., 2017. How blockchain is poised to impact supply chains. Suppl. Demand Chain 
Execut. (September), 24–25. 


Roßmann, B., Canzaniello, A., von der Gracht, H.A., Hartmann, E., 2018. The future and 
social impact of Big Data Analytics in Supply Chain Management: Results from a 
Delphi study. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 130, 135–149. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.techfore.2017.10.005. 


Rowe, G., Wright, G., 1996. The impact of task characteristics on the performance of 
structured group forecasting techniques. Int. J. Forecast. 12 (1), 73–89. 


Rowe, G., Wright, G., 1999. The Delphi technique as a forecasting tool. Issues and ana-
lysis. Int. J. Forecast. 15 (4), 353–375. 


Rowe, G., Wright, G., 2001. Expert opinion in forecasting. The role of the Delphi tech-
nique. In: Armstrong, J.S. (Ed.), Principles of Forecasting: A Handbook for 
Researchers and Practitioners. Kluwer Academic, Boston, MA, pp. 125–144. 


Rowe, G., Wright, G., Bolger, F., 1991. Delphi: A reevaluation of research and theory. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 39 (3), 235–251. 


Salancik, J.R., Wenger, W., Helfer, E., 1971. The construction of Delphi event statements. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 3 (C), 65–73. 


Schoeman, M.E.F., Mahajan, V., 1977. Using the Delphi method to assess community 
health needs. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 10 (2), 203–210. 


Schweizer, A., Knoll, P., Urbach, N., von der Gracht, H.A., Hardjono, T., 2020. To what 
extent will blockchain drive the machine economy? Perspectives from a prospective 
study. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2979286. 


Shanley, A., 2017. Could blockchain improve pharmaceutical supply chain security? 
Pharmaceut. Technol. 3, 34–39. 


Sikorski, J.J., Haughton, J., Kraft, M., 2017. Blockchain technology in the chemical in-
dustry. Machine-to-machine electricity market. Appl. Energy 195, 234–246. 


Skulmoski, G.J., Hartman, F.T., Krahn, J., 2007. The Delphi method for graduate re-
search. J. Inf. Technol. Educ. 6, 1–21. 


Spickermann, A., Grienitz, V., von der Gracht, H.A., 2014. Heading towards a multimodal 
city of the future?: Multi-stakeholder scenarios for urban mobility. Technol. Forecast. 
Soc. Change 89, 201–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.08.036. 


Steinert, M., 2009. A dissensus based online Delphi approach: An explorative research 
tool. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 76 (3), 291–300. 


Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J.M., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory 
Procedures and Techniques. Sage Publications, Newbury Park. 


Swan, M., 2015. Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy, First edition. O'Reilly, Beijing, 
Sebastopol CA. 


Tian, F., 2016. “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID & 
blockchain technology. In: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on 
Service Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM). 24-26 June, Kunming, China. 


Tian, F., 2017. “A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on HACCP, 
blockchain & internet of things. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Service Systems and Service Management. 16–18 June, Dalian, China. 


Torres, L., 2005. Service charters: reshaping trust in government – the case of Spain. 
Public Admin. Rev. 65 (6), 687–699. 


Tschorsch, F., Scheuermann, B., 2016. Bitcoin and beyond: a technical survey on de-
centralized digital currencies. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 18 (3), 2084–2123. 


Tse, D., Zhang, B., Yang, Y., Cheng, C., Mu, H., 2017. “Blockchain application in food 
supply information security. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM), 10–13 Dec, Singapore. 
Singapore. 


Underwood, S., 2016. Blockchain beyond bitcoin. Commun. ACM 59 (11), 15–17. 
van Engelenburg, S., Janssen, M., Klievink, B., 2017. Design of a software architecture 


supporting business-to-government information sharing to improve public safety and 
security. J. Intell. Inf. Syst. 30 (5), 1–24. 


Vilko, J., Ritala, P., Edelmann, J., 2014. On uncertainty in supply chain risk management. 
Int. J. Logist. Manag. 25 (1), 3–19. 


von der Gracht, H.A., 2008. The Delphi Technique for Futures Research. The Future of 
Logistics: Scenarios for 2025. Gabler, Wiesbaden, pp. 21–68. 


von der Gracht, H.A., 2012. Consensus measurement in Delphi studies. Review and im-
plications for future quality assurance. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 79 (8), 
1525–1536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.04.013. 


von der Gracht, H.A., Darkow, I.-L., 2010. Scenarios for the logistics services industry. A 
Delphi-based analysis for 2025. Int. J. Prod. Econo. 127 (1), 46–59. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijpe.2010.04.013. 


Wagner, S.M., Kemmerling, R., 2010. Handling nonresponse in logistics research. J. Bus. 
Logist. 31 (2), 357–381. 


Wamba, S.F., Queiroz, M.M., 2020. Blockchain in the operations and supply chain 
management: benefits, challenges and future research opportunities. In. J. Inf. 
Manag. 52, 102064. 


Wang, J., Wu, P., Wang, X., Shou, W., 2017. The outlook of blockchain technology for 
construction engineering management. Front. Eng. Manag. 4 (1), 67–75. 


Wang, Y., Han, J.H., Beynon-Davies, P., 2018. Understanding blockchain technology for 
future supply chains: a systematic literature review and research agenda. Supply 
Chain Manag.: Int. J. 24 (1), 62–84. 


Warth, J., von der Gracht, H.A., Darkow, I.-L., 2013. A dissent-based approach for multi- 
stakeholder scenario development – The future of electric drive vehicles. Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Change 80 (4), 566–583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.04. 
005. 


Weber, I., Xu, X., Riveret, R., Governatori, G., Ponomarev, A., Mendling, J., 2016. 
Untrusted business process monitoring and execution using blockchain. In: La Rosa, 
M., Loos, P., Pastor, O. (Eds.), Business Process Management: Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science. Springer, Cham, pp. 329–347. 


Webler, T., Levine, D., Rakel, H., Renn, O., 1991. A novel approach to reducing un-
certainty. The Group Delphi. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 39 (3), 253–263. 


White, G.R.T., 2017. Future applications of Blockchain in business and management. A 
Delphi Study. Strat. Change 26 (5), 439–451. 


Winkler, J., Kuklinski, C.P.J.-W., Moser, R., 2015. Decision making in emerging markets. 
The Delphi approach's contribution to coping with uncertainty and equivocality. J. 
Bus. Res. 68 (5), 1118–1126. 


Winkler, J., Moser, R., 2016. Biases in future-oriented Delphi studies. A cognitive per-
spective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 105, 63–76. 


Wu, H., Li, Z., King, B., Ben Miled, Z., Wassick, J., Tazelaar, J., 2017. A distributed ledger 
for supply chain physical distribution visibility. Information 8 (4), 137. 


Yeoh, P., 2017. Regulatory issues in blockchain technology. J. Financ. Regul. Compl. 25 
(2), 196–208. 


Yong, B., Shen, J., Liu, X., Li, F., Chen, H., Zhou, Q., 2020. An intelligent blockchain- 
based system for safe vaccine supply and supervision. Int. J. Inform. Manag. 52, 
102024. 


Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H., Chen, X., Wang, H., 2017. An overview of blockchain tech-
nology: architecture, consensus, and future trends. In: Proceedings IEEE International 
Congress Big Data (BigData Congress), pp. 557–564.  


Matthias Kopyto is a Doctoral Candidate and Research Assistant at the Chair of Supply 
Chain Management at the Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Germany. He earned a M.Sc. in Business Administration at the Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg. His research interests focus on supply chain digitaliza-
tion, supply chain transparency and blockchain technology.  


Dr. Sabrina Lechler is a Guest Researcher at the Chair of Supply Chain Management at 
the Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. She earned a M.Sc. in 
Industrial Engineering at the Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg. Her 
research interests focus on sustainable supply chain management, big data analytics and 
blockchain technology.  


Dr. Heiko A. von der Gracht is Professor of Futures Studies and Foresight at Steinbeis 
University, School of International Business and Entrepreneurship (SIBE), in Germany. 
Before he was Associate Professor at University of Erlangen–Nuremberg. He holds a PhD 
in Business Studies from EBS University of Business and Law, Germany. His research 
interests encompass corporate foresight, the Delphi and scenario techniques, foresight 
skills and education, and quality standards in futures research. His works have been 
published in several books and peer-reviewed journals, including Technological Forecasting 
& Social Change, Journal of Business Research, and Journal of Supply Chain Management.  


Evi Hartmann (Dr.-Ing., Technical University Berlin) is Professor of Supply Chain 
Management at the Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. Her 
primary areas of research include purchasing and supply management, global sourcing, 
and supply chain management. She has published in the International Journal of Production 
Economics, Journal of Business Logistics, International Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics Management, Journal of Supply Chain Management, and other managerial and 
academic outlets.  


M. Kopyto, et al.   



https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2980733

https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2980733

https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0076

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0076

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0078

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0078

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0080

https://doi.org/10.1002/ffo2.9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0082

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0082

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0083

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0083

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0083

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0084

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0084

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0086

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0086

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.10.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.10.005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0088

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0088

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0089

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0089

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0091

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0091

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0092

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0092

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0093

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0093

https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2979286

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0096

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0096

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0097

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0097

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.08.036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0099

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0099

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0104

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0104

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0106

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0106

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0106

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0106

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0110

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.04.013

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2010.04.013

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2010.04.013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0116

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.04.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.04.005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0119

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0119

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0122

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0122

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0123

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0123

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0124

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0124

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0126

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0126

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31156-2/sbref0126


