









Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


Available online 14 October 2020
0160-791X/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


Expert oriented approach for analyzing the blockchain adoption barriers in 
humanitarian supply chain 


Iman Ghasemian Sahebi a, Behzad Masoomi b,*, Shahryar Ghorbani c 


a Industrial Management Department, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran 
b Industrial Management Department, Islamic Azad University, Firoozkooh Branch, Tehran, Iran 
c Management Information System Department, University of Sakarya, Sakarya, Turkey   


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords: 
Blockchain 
Barrier analysis 
Technology adoption 
Humanitarian supply chain 
Best worst method 


A B S T R A C T   


In digital era, blockchain technology has been known as the operational innovation that is rapidly joining the 
context of humanitarian supply chain and relief logistic. Hence, it has the potential to change the humanitarian 
context fundamentally, but there is still relatively little-published research aimed at improving the understanding 
of the different barriers of the blockchain adoption in humanitarian supply chain. The goal of this research is to 
present a comprehensive review of blockchain adoption barriers in the context of humanitarian supply chain 
management. An integrated approach using Fuzzy Delphi and Best-Worst method (BWM) has been used for 
analyzing the barriers. Based on the literature, 14 barriers of the blockchain adoption in humanitarian supply 
chain were identified. According to the Fuzzy Delphi result, 9 barriers were accepted. After that, the BWM 
calculated the importance of each barrier. The findings showed that regulatory uncertainty, lack of knowledge/ 
employee training and high sustainability costs are the important barriers. This research provides useful 
guidelines for policy makers so that they can benefit from the results to optimize their solutions.   


1. Introduction 


As a state-of-the-art technology and a seemingly disruptive innova-
tion after the emergence of the transmission control protocol/internet 
protocol, blockchain functions based on the distributed ledger technol-
ogy have been defined as a distributed implementation of digital ledgers. 
Blockchain owes its popularity to Nakamoto as the mysterious founder 
of Bitcoin, which was introduced as a decentralized digital currency to 
the world [1]. Transcending crypto currency, according to Refs. [2,3], 
modern usage of blockchain covers intelligent E-government [4], digital 
transformation [5], electronic retailing in Newegg, products’ origin in 
Ever ledger Limited, Expedia booking services for travel, shipping in 
Maersk [6], connected transport or smart cars and supply chain man-
agement of Johnsonville and Maple Leaf Foods [7]. The technology of 
blockchain is quickly transforming daily transaction mechanisms inte-
grated with digital instruments. In other words, this technology has 
paved the way for smart contract and crypto currency. Despite defects, 
including high-energy consumption and privacy issues, a new digital 
transaction age is started. This issue has also significantly affected hu-
manitarian sectors [2]. Blockchain characteristics such as trustless 
decentralized ledgers throughout peer-to-peer networks provide 


potential for eliminating corruptive actions based on improving 
accountability and transparency, which affects smart contract, supply 
chain management and digital identity as well as the financial sector [4]. 
Humanitarian institutions are indeed willing to promote transparency 
accountability and efficiency by proposing the notion of integrating 
private and public fund tools into blockchain. The usefulness of block-
chain can manifest itself as technological plans for tracing and distrib-
uting aid fund, managing and providing identification in refugee camps 
and developing a reliable land registry; nevertheless, the likelihood of 
risks associated with privacy issues cannot be denied in this regard. 
Many researchers have reported the usefulness of blockchain; for 
instance, Michael Fauscette, the chief research officer of G2 Crowd, who 
reported digital transformation trends in 2018, emphasized blockchain 
as a means of returning identity to individuals in the absence or un-
willingness of the government [8]. He also highlighted the sweeping 
security of the technology and its presumably theoretical cyber risks. On 
the other hand, given the complication and electrical consumption of 
blockchain and its need for accessing the internet, doubts were raised 
over its reliable applicability in humanitarian disasters [9]. Blockchain 
application is facing numerous challenges and barriers, especially in a 
humanitarian supply chain that requires to be addressed outright [10, 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: Iman.ghasemain@ut.ac.ir (I.G. Sahebi), masoomibehzad4@gmail.com (B. Masoomi), mg.shahryar@gmail.com (S. Ghorbani).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Technology in Society 


journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/techsoc 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427 
Received 28 May 2020; Received in revised form 4 October 2020; Accepted 10 October 2020   



















mailto:Iman.ghasemain@ut.ac.ir

mailto:masoomibehzad4@gmail.com

mailto:mg.shahryar@gmail.com

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/0160791X

https://http://www.elsevier.com/locate/techsoc

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427&domain=pdf




Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


2


11]. Hence, it is essential to identify and prioritize the barriers, which 
are responsible for the adoption of blockchain technology in humani-
tarian supply chains. The purpose of this research is to find the most 
important barriers in research literature and background and prioritize 
them. 


The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
illustrate the literature review and present an overview of humanitarian 
supply chain, blockchain technology and blockchain adoption barriers 
based on existing studies. In Section 3, we highlight the research 
methodology and apply our proposed framework. In Section 4, we 
present the results from the applied framework. In Section 5, we discuss 
the managerial implications of the obtained results and highlight the 
future scope. 


2. Review of literature 


2.1. Humanitarian supply chain 


A supply chain contains different sections that are interested directly 
or indirectly in satisfying a customer’s demand. Humanitarian supply 
chain is one of the latest concept in the supply chain literature [12]. Two 
fundamental terms, in the context of humanistic supply chain are 
long-term development and disasters concerns. Long-term development 
matters produce human suffering and agony in an extended condition, 
and usually, their causes cannot be followed back to an individual 
calamitous event [13]. Because of the increased number of both 
man-made and natural disasters across the world, the academic com-
munity has shown renovated interest in this issue, in contemporary 
times. Therefore, diverse modeling methods, and some methodologies 
and technologies have been applied in various stages of the disaster life 
cycle to classify some new survey papers [14–17]. The unrivalled 
challenges and characteristics of humanistic supply chain are being 
analyzed in current literature. Those challenges of logisticians in hu-
manitarian course count on both the local appearance of their employer 
and types of disaster are recognized in Ref. [18]. Cooperation of activ-
ities in logistical issues are distinguished as the main challenge by re-
searchers [19]. Exams either for-profit steady supply chain procedures 
are appropriate in the non-profit humanitarian supply chain position. 
They argue that in the humanitarian supply chain condition, supply 
chain techniques and tools designed for benefit situation, specifically for 
performance assessments and partnership formation. The chief dis-
tinguishing features between the non-profit and for-profit supply chain 
with respect to sources of fund, targets of the stakeholders, the organi-
zation and performance assessment criteria revised and reviewed by 
Ref. [20]. The main aim in for-profit methods is financial return to the 
shareholders, whereas to obtain the social goals and mission effectively 
is in non-profit one [21]. 


As study on humanitarian supply chain is more concentrated about 
disaster, literature is relevant to the long-term humanitarian supply 
chain [22]. Attaches aid recipients (beneficiaries) to the list while 
emphasizing the distinction between international and national 
community-based organizations. Humanitarian supply chains include 
more than only humanitarian organizations [23]. Recommended re-
covery, readiness, response, and mitigation [24]. Highlighted avoid-
ance, transition, and recovery [25], enumerated donors, aid 
organizations, NGOs, governments, army, logistics service providers, 
and suppliers as actors of HSC [26]. Specifies emergency relief, reha-
bilitation, and development , [27] and readiness, response, and recovery 
[28] are important phase of HSC. Realized and achieved the optimal 
procurement policy, and analyzed inventory management are important 
issue in humanitarian organization under budget limitations over a 
limited planning period [29]. Indicated the level of improved efficiency 
in respect to handling extra volume, which was achieved without 
investing in extra warehouse place and reflected the warehouse opera-
tions in a non-profit food supply chain. Some examples like food security 
and health care are considered in the application of operation research 


to develop the effectiveness of the system in long-term humanitarian 
supply chain in some literature parts [30–32]. 


2.2. Blockchain technology 


Blockchain is mostly applied in different cryptocurrencies. The 
appearance of Ethereum in 2014 is the first important progression of 
blockchain technology [4]. Nevertheless, an obligatory element of 
blockchain projects is still the cryptocurrency requiring the consensus 
for the disposed ledger and the core part to keep trust. The Linux 
foundation formally introduced Hyperledger in 2017, which is its open 
source project and is presented as the third generation of blockchain in 
advertisement. The key characteristic of blockchain projects is the view 
of ‘smart contract’ and from then on, the cryptocurrency stops to be a 
native element [33]. 


Today, in 4 dimensions including (1) a cryptography behind, (2) a 
distributed ledger, (3) the smart contracts and (4) the choice of 
consensus protocol, the blockchain application could be discussed. 
Blockchains are distributed peer-to-peer networks, in technical terms, 
that are immutable, append-only, up-to-date only through peer 
consensus and cryptographically safe (they are very difficult to change) 
[34]. Blockchain which runs on high part of the internet protocols is 
another application layer, and without needing a trusted third party, 
allow economic transactions between related parties [35]. As inventory 
and registry systems for the tracing, recording, contracting of every 
asset, monitoring and whether electronic or physical, legal and financial 
blockchains can also be used [36]. Over a given period, a list of trans-
actions is registered to a log, creating a ‘block’ in a blockchain system. As 
each transaction happens, it is put into a block. Before and after it, each 
block is joined to the blocks. By means of a hashing function, these 
blocks are mathematically ‘connected or chained’ together; within the 
blockchain, we could consider a hash as a digital fingerprint of data to 
jail it in setting [37]. When they are matched in a chain, these blocks 
become immutable and by a single actor, they cannot be omitted or 
changed. Instead, by automation and contributed governance protocols, 
they are handled and verified [38]. In addition, by blockchain knots (the 
users/computers taking part in a blockchain network), the verification is 
done. No single node governs the data and each node consists of a total 
record of entire transactions ever penetrated in that blockchain. 


Usually, most of knots in the blockchain network must endorse the 
biography (history) of the suggested single block and accomplish algo-
rithms to assess, especially when an adaption to a present contract or a 
new transaction go in a blockchain. If the history and signature of most 
nodes entered to a consensus are authentic, a new block is attached to 
the series of contracts and the modern block of contracts is admitted into 
the log [37]. Consequently, by applying advanced encryption methods, 
the verification process can efficiently save the data in blockchain logs 
against invalid manipulation or access. Participants always have access 
to an extensive analysis of activities by securing this setup [39]. To 
innovate a self-regulating system without the requirement of third 
groups, the exceptional essence of blockchains exists in their capability 
to insist on the rules. Instead, by means of a consensus algorithm, the 
enforcement is performed. Blockchains hence ‘program’ the 
much-needed ‘trust’ in digital systems demanded by some people [40]. 
Over the control access mechanism, there are two kinds of blockchains 
(i.e. it shows who can take part in the consensus process, read a block-
chain, and give transactions to the blockchain):  


✓ Permitted blockchains. In this kind, participators should receive an 
invitation or in contrast, have permission to connect. A single orga-
nization (private blockchains) or by consortium blockchains (mem-
bers of consortium) tends to control the access.  


✓ Public blockchains. In this kind, users can be kept anonymous and all 
contracts are public (thereby ‘permission less’), in order to stimulate 
more participants to connect the network, the network typically has 
an incentivizing mechanism. A typical example is Bitcoin. 


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                






Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


3


2.3. Blockchain in humanitarian supply chain 


In multiple industries, the potential of blockchain has been discov-
ered. The technology suggests the disintermediation process (substitut-
ing the middlemen by blockchain technology), by which almost every 
industry can be disturbed [9]. Also, blockchain is the next humanitarian 
aid industry disrupter, which is supported by many blockchain fans 
[41]. For transferring financial humanitarian aid, blockchain technol-
ogy can potentially be applied for cash transfer. 


Therefore, it can only be applied to transfer cash by using blockchain 
in the humanitarian supply chain. Blockchain has the capability of 
creating the aid industry by making it more digitized and future-fit, 
chiefly by transferring cash and stepping away from in-kind donations 
since aid agencies are struggling for a more direct transfer of aid. By 
means of national banks or the government, blockchain technology 
recommends a protocol to cash control. Therefore, blockchain is secure 
from fraud because it is not possible to remove blocks from the trans-
action, and for getting lost to corrupt governments, it is suggested a way 
to prevent financial aid. Formerly, duo to lack of trust, it was tried to 
analyze how aid agencies are doubtful to make the shift to cash transfers. 
They were worried that the cash might not reach the intended goal and 
be finished in the wrong hands. Moreover, it means that the cash can be 
traced back and the transaction will be completely transparent. More 
affected people can receive the assistance they deserve, if blockchain 
could be enabled less, in-kind donations would come to waste, more aid 
agencies to switch to cash and aid delivery would become more efficient. 
If blockchain has been praised for the positions it suggests, it does not 
come as any surprise. Generally, the profit of blockchain is that it is a 
decentralized system, with the service of a permissionless blockchain. 
No centralized institution possesses the blockchain. Thereby, in theory, 
problems can be eradicated are fundamental to the humanitarian help 
supply chain. 


2.4. Blockchain adoption barriers 


There are also some important barriers to blockchain adoption, in 
spite of the immense capability of blockchain technology. 


2.4.1. Scalability issues 
Scalability is the capability of blockchain calculating processes to 


apply in a vast range of potentialities and to fulfil these aims. This is a 
significant issue. Actually, 60% of business executives stated that, pri-
marily due to scalability issues, executing blockchain was harder than 
they initially assumed [42]. Especially, it is described that blockchain 
technology capability decreases latency (the delay or the time interval 
when a component of a system is holding on and waiting for other 
system element to carry out a task) while it meets an aimed level of 
processing output [43]. In contrast to bitcoin (public blockchain appli-
cation) that handle only approximately seven transactions per second, 
Ethereum (a kind of public open source blockchain created to protect 
applications which is decentralized for example intelligent contracts) 
handles approximately 20 contacts per second since blockchain tech-
nology is computationally comprehensive [44]. 


2.4.2. Integrating Problems 
The complicated process of integrting blockchain software with 


legacy systems is another main barriers related to blockchain technology 
adjustment. This is not only a substitute of their current systems, but also 
for a particular business goal in majority of organizations for executing 
or implementing the contemplation of blockchain technology. Addi-
tionally, to contribute data effectively, those systems may be required to 
interact with one another if multiple blockchains are applied. “For the 
integration process, conflicts with existing platforms, an analysis of data 
security, and possible bottlenecks, will be needed” [33]. The combina-
tion of blockchain technology with present systems is expensive to fulfil 
and time-consuming. The combination of blockchain technology with 


various legacy systems or within the blockchain ecosystem, are parts of 
the reason for the high cost due to the lack of standard, off-the-shelf 
interfaces, that will possibly require to be customized keys. Hence, it 
still requires creating application programming interface (API) gateways 
in order to encounter new blockchain consortium applications with 
legacy systems. The present legacy systems are not possibly consistent 
with blockchain technology; therefore, it is demanding that the imple-
mentation costs of blockchain be completely replaced and attached to 
them [45]. 


2.4.3. Lack of standardization 
Decentralization is essential process of blockchain technology [43]. 


Blockchain coders and developers obtain a kind of great donation, called 
freedom due to the decentralized and scattering nature of blockchain so 
that they are able to accommodate systems to the requests of special 
consumers. Due to the scarcity of standardization of information tech-
nology (IT) departments, they cannot be recognized without translation 
help, and platforms cannot convey and communicate well [45]. In line 
with a research by Deloitte, the most famous software cooperation 
platform is GitHub with over than 68 repositories (the software of pro-
jects presenting code), 337 diverse languages and more than 24 million 
users that is called a cloud-based code repository. On GitHub, different 
platforms with several protocols, privacy measures, consensus, coding 
languages and mechanisms are presented in blockchain projects [46]. In 
addition, the absence of standardization hinders blockchain members to 
be able to communicate and cooperate efficiently, even though for de-
velopers and coders. The decentralized feature of blockchain provides 
more latitude in fulfilling their aims. 


2.4.4. Complexity of establishing 
It is a highlighted survey, that presented the complication and costs 


related “to establishing blockchain keys as the main barriers to the 
adjusting the technology” in Deloitte’s 2018 Global Blockchain [45]. An 
important start-up expense for industries and companies that adjust the 
technology is a need to moving from legacy IT systems to systems based 
on blockchain. The adoption can be obstructed by integration issues, 
complicated programming, a lack of blockchain improvement talent, 
and testing. 


In addition, its complexity is added to innovative methods for 
emphasizing scalability while obtaining security, and storage concerns 
as well. Finding out improving relevant governance structures, 
balancing the sharing tradeoffs (segmenting the data base so that every 
transaction is not managed by all nodes) and the clue of modern 
consensus mechanisms are a few of the matters that the blockchain 
technology adopters must surmount. Better blockchain templates, plat-
forms, and tools help decrease the hardship of blockchain complexities, 
to facilitate the lack of skills and act like a service cloud providers (BaaS) 
like, Microsoft, Amazon, and IBM as well. Nevertheless, emphasizing the 
resources of blockchain diversity occur at a price, whether handled in- 
house or outsourced. 


2.4.5. Regulatory uncertainty 
Frequently, the technological progress of blockchain has led to the 


improvement of a relevant legitimate framework, with disturbing 
technologies. In a Survey by Deloitte’s 2018 Global Blockchain, it was 
mentioned that 39% of respondents cited “regulatory items” that pre-
vented firms from causing investments in blockchain technology that 
was categorized as the most crucial item [42]. “The cause and reason are 
the introduction of some method and concepts by technology for in-
stances intelligent contracts and cryptographic signatures that do not 
emphasize present and existing laws” [42]. It shows that “blockchain 
ledgers could be dependent on international jurisdictions or various 
state, because they exist on nodes in several locations, therefore conflict 
with tax regulations and current legal explanation and definitions” [33]. 
These matters intensify the request of new standard backbones that 
emphasize the legalized concerns increased over appearing application 


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                






Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


4


in different legal settings and businesses. 


2.4.6. Lack of knowledge/employee training 
Businesses, in the most primary stage, face problem for finding and 


keeping employees who have the knowledge and essential skills in order 
to perform efficiently with blockchain technology. In all industries, 
employees with a skill based on blockchain, clearly warrant premium 
recovery and significant demand are put forward for expanding tech-
nology with the capability to obstruct the out-of-date methods to 
accomplish businesses. Furthermore, businesses, without some suffi-
cient certified and skillful employees cannot be capable of recognizing 
the full profits related for executing blockchain technology [34]. 
Blockchain technology is only restricted to financial services industry 
and cryptocurrencies on more macro level according to the belief of 
most business administrators. Consequently, administrators in in-
dustries like automotive, agribusiness, consumer products sectors, oil 
and gas and health care, who are misunderstood blockchain’s abilities, 
may be neglecting—at their own peril— the capability to ameliorate 
data security and transform the manner in which their businesses are 
done in an appearing technology for main cost savings [2]. 


2.4.7. Market-based risks 
There are constant fear among blockchain users for payment mer-


chants that can be adjusted with the modern tool in the future time 
[47–49]. Apart from that, the whole attempt for launching blockchains 
as an innovative platform for various industries can become fruitless. In 
addition, because of the comparatively low attainability of the tools 
based on blockchain in the real market, blockchain users encounter an 
unusual flimsy market problem [50–52]. Thus, without overturning the 
entire market, a person who is willing to trade or withdraw with a great 
deal of tools, cannot do well. Generally, users may be tempted to store 
their tools with such uncertainty in the recent market. 


2.4.8. Technology Risks 
Blockchains ache from harsh technology challenges, but traditional 


application software and Operating Systems are free from this issues; an 
instance of this issue is the complex installation of extended software 
promotion over all mining computers. Frequently, the protocol updates 
can be reel really owing to the existance of a bug in software, or in-
compatibilities in a specific user blocks so that the whole blockchain 
may be impelled to slit [53]. Every user in the network has to be 
consistent and roll back their updates and upgrades in the complete 
blockchain. Afterwards, trained users in the network have to be discreet 
because deliberate updates for software protocol are problematic to 
perform, and often deliberately hinder such activity. Through block-
chain, with the loss of keys related to cryptographic, another widespread 
problem can take place. If in blockchain, some private/public informa-
tion, keys, and cues are lost, stolen, or expired, these blocks cannot be 
regained [54]. Even though these keys may be presented physically in 
the blockchain network, and cannot be removed or excavated any more. 
In contrast to any other centrally directed economical tools, this scene 
indicates an enormous challenge when applying blockchain. 


2.4.9. High sustainability costs 
Through digging networks, a massive electrical energy is required to 


perform the difficult calculations and to extract blockchain as well. By 
means of applications related to blockchain, extracting, performed by 
the power consumption of a personal computer that largely excels the 
monetary rewards, can be ultimately generated. In situations like this, 
by applying personal computers, there is a missing proposition for dig-
gers to extract blockchains [53,55]. Structure of processor in computer 
is developing, and the whole part of network can use potency and power, 
to highlight a megacity. In addition, in universal financial market, the 
relevant rewards are increased with an increase in the value of 
blockchain-based economical tools, thus more miners are absorbed to 
carry out their tasks on the network. Unluckily, the increase of network 


load and calculation are not conveyed into larger financial benefits. 
Also, the problem of establishing perpetual blockchains can be increased 
by scalability concerns [55,56]. 


2.4.10. Low/no transaction fees 
Before activating the entire network, a crucial mass of users are 


essential to cumulate because execution, implementation, and adoption 
in blockchain is an expensive proposition. Initially, miners are applied to 
solve puzzles and finally rewards are given in currencies in the current 
cryptocurrency frameworks. Nevertheless, the number of related miners 
will be raised while a blockchain network improves in size. Conse-
quently, those puzzles will become more highly developed, and related 
rewards will decrease extremely. Step by step, due to the extended 
calculation to essential resources, it cannot be beneficial to dig block-
chains [49]. Recently, by applying a blockchain network, no payment is 
done. Nevertheless, the subscription fee will be received from all users 
and the network will permeate when adoption raises. In order to support 
the information systems adoption for example ERP, software products, 
and telecommunications, same payment mechanisms have been per-
formed [57]. In addition, the influence of a volatile economy and un-
stable market can be neglected in modern models of blockchain [58]. 
The fancies of the present blockchain users is the choice of decision 
because the decentralized character of blockchain protocols evades the 
interruption of any centralized financial exchange or institution. Lastly, 
research has indicated that within small blockchain networks and 
among miner groups, fraudulence is possible. Thus, the nature of the 
decentralized character of these platforms is controversial. Five industry 
specialists believe that cartelization and miner banding are conducted to 
returns to criteria, by which small miners gradually would be eradicated 
from the marketplace [53]. 


2.4.11. Risks of Privacy 
For blockchain users, transactions can be conducted for important 


privacy issues. The blockchains privacy protocols in papers of [59] are 
discussed revealing that majority of users are not aware of backup 
mechanisms and the inbuilt privacy designs. Main transactions are 
implemented across the internet, in a public blockchain, in which by 
analyzing previous transaction block, the uniqueness of the included 
parties can be uncovered immediately. Thereby their validity details are 
obtainable [60]. Furthermore, if a contract error exists, from the error 
log, users can pursue him/her. Finally, the anonymous user is exposed 
and compromised. Nevertheless, this kind of anonymity can be harmful 
and damaging to the entire users, if some malevolent user is involved in 
illegal activity. On the other hand, nobles are unaware of the exact 
identification of one another in a private blockchain network, and 
mutual trust the consensus on all transaction. So instead of being a clear 
platform for clear and recognizable business mechanisms, a blockchain 
may act as a private cartel [61]. In addition, in blockchains, data privacy 
concerns can be conducted to govern the results; one industry specialist 
mentioned. For example, users might encounter harsh problems, if 
electronic health records are located across the blockchain network and 
whose records are breached. As a result, the privacy of location requires 
to be attained for all users, so that agreement and compliance concerns 
and data government can be monitored [62,63]. 


2.4.12. Usage in underground economy 
Traders and businesses, who deal with controversial and illicit 


property, were the introductory adopters in blockchain technology. 
Otherwise, that would be inhibited by regulation and law. Frequently, in 
order to prepare the financial framework to this kind of transactions, 
cryptocurrencies were applied, that implemented, executed and hosted 
by means of Tor such as Darknet [49]. Lately, as payment ways and 
methods, other money laundering activities and gambling have started 
to apply blockchains. While, there was a prohibition in the Silk Route 
marketplace, where the bitcoin prices 1, an acute decline was an 
example of its instantaneous impact. Also, two academic experts and 


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                






Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


5


nine industry professionals endorsed the use of blockchains networks in 
subway finance that could endanger their high-scale adjusting in key 
services and industries. 


2.4.13. Risk of cyber-attacks 
Infrastructure obstructions and a denial of service (DoS), two ex-


amples of network-based raids, can cause congestion and delays in the 
blockchain network, which change the information reached through 
user knots and twist their viewpoints of the shelf [64]. Over submerging 
the nodes with forged demands, a DoS raid and rush are targeted to 
disturb the common operation in blockchain network. The present al-
gorithm named Proof-of-Work is highly unprotected to raids. By the 
same token, a DoS attack can be commenced by an attacker on a P2P 
blockchain without accepting the well-timed transport of mined blocks 
[65]. Furthermore, if a pool on the blockchain network or a computa-
tionally powerful node intends to raise its payoffs for mining, it can go 
off from the present protocol named Proof-of -Work, via particularly 
keeping blocks from spreading [66]. Through this mode, while an in-
dividual miner can monitor above 33% resources calculation in overall 
network, conceited mining invaders can collect larger force truthful 
nodes and revenues to adjust. Once more [66], it begins by doubled 
spending raids and attacks where, an individual block can be reused by 
that miner for several times [67]. 


2.4.14. Contractual risk 
The risk related to the administration and development of trans-


actions to control and monitor the entire relations inherent for the 
development of blockchain is partially associated with vendor risk. 
Additionally, service-level agreements (SLAs) and vendor relationships 
are essential to explain and handle the relations among all the partici-
pating nodes and the blockchain administrator [8]. Consider that the 
privileges and rights of participators in blockchain can differ vastly, and 
for each relationship, unique SLAs are needed. Efficient SLA enforce-
ment, controlling and monitoring are crucial to have a successful event 
and experience in blockchain. 


In this sub-section, we identify the barriers from extant literature and 
feedback from experts. Next, As mentioned above, we summarize these 
barriers into 14 significant categories based on our initial discussion 
with the experts, present them in Table 1. 


The literature review of blockchain adoption indicates that majority 
of the researches have focused on a detailed analysis on the obstructions 
that hinder the satisfactory adjustment of blockchains in humanitarian 
supply chain. Furthermore, on cryptocurrencies, practice and academia 
have massively emphasized blockchain adjusting. [50], for instance, 
have discussed various concerns and risks associated with 


cryptocurrencies. A technology acceptance model has been indicated by 
Refs. [72] to analyze related risks and the perceived profits as the main 
preventions of bitcoin use. Lately, relevant questions have been 
increased about opportunities for blockchain adjusting consumers and 
the possible risks [10]. 


Even then, it is understood that the remaining literature requires an 
individual extensive study, that diagnose the main obstructions, classify 
them in line with their significance. As a result, it highlights the ob-
structions to successful blockchain adjusting in humanitarian supply 
chain, with the inputs from experts and literature. After that, it was 
discussed the barriers, and lastly, they are categorized in this study. 
Then we analyzed the barriers, and finally ranked them. Briefly, we 
addressed the following research questions: 


RQ1. What are the barriers to a successful implementation of bloch-
chain technology across humanitarian supply chain? 


RQ2. Among them, what are the prominent barriers that need imme-
diate attention from managers? 


3. Research methodology 


This research employs inductive approaches to conclude a set of 
rewards associated with blockchain adoption barriers in humanitarian 
supply chains. This study uses the fuzzy Delphi method to discover and 
screening the blockchain adoption barriers. Other applied method is 
BWM that benefited effectively for the ranking the blockchain adoption 
barriers. For some articles in English-speaking journals, we did a sys-
tematic search, to fill the research gap. The bibliographic databases 
searched include Science Direct, Wiley, Springer, Taylor & Francis, 
Emerald, Google Scholar and Web of Science. Up to now, the search 
approved that with a focus on blockchain adoption barriers in human-
itarian supply chains that help to get better understanding for the 
research gap, no study has been published. The data required for the 
existing study was gathered through different resources like archival 
data, which consisted interviews with experts, organization booklet, 
documents, and brochures. A decision team of 6 experts took part in the 
procedure of data gathering, and in Table 2, their background is shown. 


Due to the experience, and position within their organizations, the 
specialists chose the panel named Delphi. The writers preffered quali-
tative methods for data collection, specifically, semi-structured in-
terviews, when they prepare a more productive data source than 
quantitative approaches [77]. Because this research is the explorative 
one, we launch the data collection process, after finishing the panel by 
the experts. Lastly, the experts’ answers and responses were gathered. A 
review of literature, a questionnaire and semi-structured interviews are 
data gathering tools. The primary tool was carried out to reveal an 
introductory literature in research. We used both keywords of block-
chain adoption and humanitarian supply chain in our literature review. 
Afterwards, experts identified the blockchain adoption barriers in hu-
manitarian supply chain, with review the research literature. Those two 
stages were conducted for the arrangement of obstructions encountering 
in practice by experts [78]. The third stage of data collecting included 
asking specialist to indicate the significance of the blockchain adoption 
barriers in humanitarian supply chain from the second and first stages 
on a ten-point scale, arranging from “so unimportant” to “so important”. 


Table 1 
Summary of blockchain adoption barriers.  


No. Barriers References 


1 Scalability Issues [43,44,68], 2- cryptocurrency experts 
2 Integrating Problems [33,42,43,45,46], 1- cryptocurrency 


experts 
3 Lack of Standardization [43,45,69], 1- humanitarian experts 
4 Complexity of Establishing [45], 2- cryptocurrency experts, 1- DSC 


experts 
5 Regulatory Uncertainty [33,42,45], 1- academic expert 
6 Lack of Knowledge/Employee 


Training 
[49,52,56], 1- DSC experts 


7 Market-based Risks [48–51,70–73], 1- academic experts 
8 Technology Risks [49,53,54], 2- cryptocurrency experts 
9 High Sustainability Costs [53,55,56,74,75], 2- cryptocurrency 


experts 
10 Low/No Transaction Fees [49,52,56], 1- DSC experts, 1- academic 


experts 
11 Risks of Privacy [59–63], 2- cryptocurrency experts 
12 Usage in Underground Economy [49,53,76], 2- humanitarian experts 
13 Risk of Cyber-Attacks [64,66,67], 2- cryptocurrency experts 
14 Contractual Risk [8], 1- DSC experts, 1- academic experts  


Table 2 
Background of expert panel.  


Expert No. Specialty Work Experience (year) 


1 Cryptocurrency 3 
2 Cryptocurrency 4 
3 Humanitarian Funding 2 
4 Humanitarian Funding 6 
5 Academic 8 
6 Digital Supply Chain 4  


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                


















Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


6


Then Best Worst method was used to find out the preferences of each 
barriers. BWM is also effective in research involving a limited sample 
size of experts [87]. For instance, past studies have used 12 experts [89], 
3 experts [93], and 6 experts [94]. In the subsequent sub-sections, we 
describe the BWM technique in detail. The methodology structure of 
research, in Fig. 1, is presented. Thus, we suggested a framework with 
three stages for studying blockchain adoption barriers in humanitarian 
supply chain. The stages in this backbone are described in the next parts. 


3.1. Fuzzy Delphi method 


In the 1950s, Delphi approach was expanded by Helmer and Dalkey 
[79]. This method is an expert opinion survey technique is with four 
basic features and characteristics: iteration, and statistical group 
response, controlled feedback, and anonymous response [80]. The Fuzzy 
Delphi Method (FDM) is an approach for forming a group communica-
tion procedure (which is impressive and effective) by preparing reaction 
from evaluation of group judgments [81] and information contributions 
for everybody to re-assess their opinions and judgments. In the majority 
of actual contexts, specialists’ opinion and judgment cannot be exactly 
clarified into values of quantitative and data of crisp which are not 
sufficient to create actual systems because of the imprecision, the sub-
jective nature of human thinking, preferences, judgment and vagueness 
[82]. Based on this method, by Ref. [83] theory of fuzzy set, a pleasant 
instrument was recommended to overcome the abovementioned prob-
lem [84]. The FDM first suggested by Ref. [85] is a mix of Delphi method 
and fuzzy set theory. These following stages, associated with FDM [84]: 


Stage 1: Distinguishing the research-study yardstick and criteria. 


Distinguishing the probable obstructions associated to the research. 
First, the probable yardstick and criteria should be distinguished by 
means of elaborate review and literature of review. 


Stage 2: Gathering specialists’ judgements and opinions by applying 
group decision. 


Additionally, after clarifying appropriate criteria performance, 
relative to the research, an expert is invited to detect the importance of 
the criteria which was identified, indicated in Table 3, via a question-
naire by applying the linguistic variables. The research employs a mean 
geometric model for detecting the experts’ decision group and assessing 
the barriers called Triangular Fuzzy Numbers (TFNs). 


Stage 3: Identifying criteria 


The last stage in the FDM is determining the significant criteria, 
executed by calculating of each criterion weight with the thresholdS̃. By 
the average of all criteria weight, the ̃S value is compared. Over this way, 
for each criterion, the (TFNs) τ must be set up, as explained in (1)–(5). 


ãij =
(
aij, bij, cij


)
for i= 1,…, n, j= 1,…,m (1)  


τ̃j =
(
aj, bj, cj


)
(2)  


aj =min
{


aij
}


(3)  


bj =
(
∏n


i=1
bij


)1
n


(4)  


cj =max
{


cij
}


(5) 


In above-mentioned equations, index icorrelates with the expert and 
index jcorrelates with the criterion. The note ãij is each criterion fuzzy 
value, which is gained from every expert, and each criterion fuzzy 
average value, is τ̃j. 


In addition, each criterion of fuzzy average value is defuzzified into 
value crisp, according to: 


Crisp value=
a + b + c


3 (6) 


After computing abovementioned values, if the value of crisp ̃τj ≥ S̃ ,
after criteriajis chosen for following research stage and if the value 
crisp of τ̃j < S̃, after criteriajis refused. 


3.2. Best Worst Method 


BWM is a comparison-based MCDM method that compares the best 
criterion with the other criteria, and all the other criteria to the worst 
criterion. The goal is to find the optimal weights and consistency ratio 
through a simple linear optimization model constructed by the com-
parison system [87]. BWM has been applied in vast research area such 
logistics performance, optimal search model, medical tourism develop-
ment, research and development, investment opportunities, sustainable 
oil supply chain management, web service selection, barriers to hu-
manitarian supply chain management etc. [88–91]. 


Below is a description of the steps of BWM to derive the weight of the 
criteria [92]: 


Fig. 1. Research framework.  


Table 3 
Linguistic scales [86].  


Linguistic term Fuzzy number 


Very low (VL) (0, 0, 0.25) 
Low (L) (0, 0.25, 0.5) 
Medium (M) (0.25, 0.5, 0.75) 
High (H) (0.5, 0.75, 1) 
Very high (VH) (0.75, 1, 1)  


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                






Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


7


1) Determine the set of decision criteria {c1, c2,…, cn} by decision- 
makers.  


2) Determine the best and the worst criterion to be used for the decision 
environment: 


In this step, decision-makers choose the best and the worst criterion 
among the set of criteria identified in Step 1 from their perspective. The 
best criterion represents the most important criterion and the worst 
criterion is the least important criterion for the decision.  


3) Determine the preference of the best criterion over all the other 
criteria: 


A number between 1 and 9 (1: equally important, 9: extremely more 
important) is used to indicate this value. The resulting Best-to-Others 
vector would be as AB = (aB1,aB2,…,aBn). Where aBjindicates the pref-
erence of criterion B (best criterion) over criterion j andaBB = 1.  


4) Determine the preference of each of the other criteria over the worst 
criterion: 


A number between 1 and 9 is assigned in this case as well. The 
Others-to-Worst vector would be as AW = (a1W, a2W,…, anW)T. Where, 
ajW indicates the preference of the criterion j over the worst criterion W 
and aWW. 


3.3. Find the optimal weights (w*1,w*2,…,w*n) 


Solving the problem (1) will result in the optimal weights for the 
criteria. To determine the optimal weights of the criteria, the maximum 
absolute differences {


⃒⃒
wB −aBjwj


⃒⃒
,
⃒⃒
wj −ajwww


⃒⃒
} for all j should be 


minimized. 


minmaxj
{⃒⃒
⃒⃒wB
wj


− aBj
⃒⃒
⃒⃒,
⃒⃒
⃒⃒wj
ww


− ajw
⃒⃒
⃒⃒
}


s.t
∑


j
wj = 1 wj ≥ 0, for all j (7) 


By solving this problem, the optimal weights (w*1,w*2,…,w*n) and the 
optimal value of ξ*are obtained. In the linear model, ξ* is defined as the 
consistency ratio of the comparison system. It means that the closer ξ* is 
to a zero value the more consistent the comparison system provided by 
the decision makers. 


4. Findings 


As mentioned above, in the second step, the FDM is used to select the 


identified barriers from the ones listed in the previous step. The output 
of FDM indicated in Table 4. 


According to the expert’s opinion and FDM results, the barriers of 
blockchain adoption in humanitarian supply chains was finalized and is 
shown in Table 5. 


In the last step, the BWM was used to calculate the selected barriers 
weight to rank them. The expert panel was requested to determine the 
worst and the best criteria. Afterwards, the decision panel was requested 
to prepare the priority to the best criterion across other criteria and to 
afford the priority to other criteria across the worst one. These inputs of 
the decision panel structured Best-to-Others vector and Others-to-Worst 
vector that respectively in Table 6 and Table 7 are presented. 


The final weights of barriers are determined with a linear model (7) 
of BWM. By solving this linear model, optimized weights and ξ* can be 
obtained for each expert. Then by calculating arithmetic mean of the 
weights of criteria for each expert, final weights of criteria were ob-
tained. Table 8 and Fig. 2 show the BWM results. 


As can be seen from the BWM results, ‘Regulatory Uncertainty (C3)’, 
‘Lack of Knowledge/Employee Training (C4)’ and ‘High Sustainability 
Costs (C7)’ are the most important barriers and, ‘Integrating Problems 
(C2)’, ‘Risks of Privacy (C8)’ and ‘Technology Risks (C6)’ are the least 
important barriers respectively. As shown in Table 8, the comparisons 
show a very high consistency as the value of ξ* is close to zero. 


5. Discussion and conclusion 


Blockchain was formerly being utilized for conflict reduction, better 
land residency and property rights, making safe digital identities, and 
tackling gender disparity. Therefore, these activities contribute to the 
plan of the sustainable development objects in innovative paths. There is 
further a potential in blockchain technology, including possible appli-
cations inside the humanitarian supply chain. One of the most exciting 


Table 4 
Result of FDM. 


Table 5 
Accepted blockchain adoption barriers in humanitarian supply chains.  


Index Barriers 


C1 Scalability Issues 
C2 Integrating Problems 
C3 Regulatory Uncertainty 
C4 Lack of Knowledge/Employee Training 
C5 Market-based Risks 
C6 Technology Risks 
C7 High Sustainability Costs 
C8 Risks of Privacy 
C9 Contractual Risk  


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                






Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


8


overviews is the application of smart contracts to automatize funding via 
anticipate-based financing. Paired with Big Data analyzing, such models 
could present for more effective and less political funding tools. 


This investigation distinguished the potential barriers to the adop-
tion of the blockchain technology in humanitarian supply chain. The 
barriers distinguished in this work are apparently transitory in nature 
because of the oddity of the blockchain technology and as it develops 
these impediments may be amended [51]. The barriers are also not 
particular to one utilities of the technology. Along these lines, the goal of 
this research is to recognize field of blockchain limitation to encourage 
future academic and professional work in those ways and simulta-
neously, assist the fulfillment of specialized development. The ideas of 
trust, chance, protection, security, norms and guidelines are built up 
territories of research for researchers. These barriers could be areas for 


future academic study in the novel context of blockchain worth theo-
retical contributions. Moreover, this work can serve as the incentive for 
the formation of a universal theoretical model of barriers to the 
admission of a new technology. In addition, they can present the mis-
understandings of the probable adopters similar those to trust, safety, 
privacy, danger avoidance by innovatively designed blockchain solu-
tions to encourage reception. Practitioners also have to cooperate 
actively to solicit the required skills and resources and involve the 
pertinent regulatory bodies to accelerate the standardization of the 
technology. 


The execution of blockchain in the humanitarian supply chain and 
barriers to successful blockchain accomplishment are presently getting 
significant managerial and study consideration. Initially, to make this 
framework, we used the experts opinions and the existing literature on 
successful blockchain execution. Our research is amongst the imple-
mentation of blockchain technology in humanitarian sector apart from 
cryptocurrencies. We do not assert to be fully inclusive in our review, 
but the suggested framework is capable of offering a comprehensive 
collection of barriers that have been plaguing the humanitarian sector. 
Next, we critically evaluated numerous barriers for blockchain adop-
tion, with the assistance of a strategic valuation method that constructs a 
framework grounded on BWM and managerial inputs from experts 
working at humanitarian monetary services, cryptocurrency and digital 
section, and university. This research was directed to afford a full ac-
count of such a complex phenomenon of blockchain adoption barriers in 
HSCM. Qualitative insights for this study were obtained through an 
assessment of the open-ended comments provided by 6 Delphi partici-
pants. In this study, from 14 barriers only 9 barriers were accepted. This 
hybrid approach is a novel method that can systematically deal with 
many uncertain problems with interactive criteria. The most important 
barriers and challenges were related to the regulatory uncertainty as it is 
shown in Table 8. The results of the appraisal of the blockchain adoption 


Table 6 
Best-to-Others vector.  


Expert Best criteria C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 


Expert1 C4 3 5 5 1 7 4 7 7 5 
Expert2 C3 4 5 1 6 5 6 5 6 3 
Expert3 C3 4 4 1 6 6 4 3 5 4 
Expert4 C7 3 6 2 3 4 7 1 8 5 
Expert5 C4 5 6 2 1 5 7 4 8 2 
Expert6 C3 4 4 1 7 5 5 6 7 4  


Table 7 
Others-to-Worst vector.  


Expert Worst Criteria C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 


Expert1 C2 4 1 5 6 4 4 6 7 5 
Expert2 C8 2 4 6 8 4 6 3 1 4 
Expert3 C2 5 1 5 7 6 5 5 7 3 
Expert4 C2 4 1 4 5 3 6 4 7 4 
Expert5 C8 3 4 5 7 5 4 4 1 5 
Expert6 C2 4 1 5 5 6 3 2 4 4  


Table 8 
Results of BWM.   


C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 ξ*  


Expert1 0.152 0.032 0.091 0.309 0.065 0.114 0.065 0.076 0.091 0.048 
Expert2 0.106 0.085 0.291 0.071 0.085 0.106 0.085 0.0258 0.142 0.035 
Expert3 0.095 0.031 0.254 0.063 0.191 0.063 0.127 0.095 0.076 0.027 
Expert4 0.123 0.038 0.185 0.123 0.092 0.052 0.262 0.046 0.074 0.008 
Expert5 0.065 0.054 0.163 0.261 0.108 0.046 0.108 0.027 0.163 0.065 
Expert6 0.135 0.042 0.287 0.057 0.135 0.081 0.067 0.057 0.135 0.018 
Final weight 0.112 0.047 0.211 0.147 0.112 0.077 0.119 0.054 0.113 0.0335 
Rank 6 9 1 2 5 7 3 8 4   


Fig. 2. Summary of BWM results.  


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                














Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


9


at humanitarian sector, and inputs provided by their managers helped us 
to garner some preliminary insights into the significance of these bar-
riers and their sequence. For our study, based on the available experts, 
challenges in regulatory uncertainty (C3), lack of knowledge/employee 
training (C4) and high sustainability costs (C7) were the most significant 
barriers. These findings are interesting because the blockchain 
ecosystem was conceived to overcome each of these shortcomings pre-
sent in the incumbent financial instruments and platforms. 


5.1. Contribution and managerial implications 


The literature review has revealed that HSCs are characterized by a 
challenging and dynamic stakeholder network coupled with high un-
certainty and low transparency in the information and resource flow. 
The evidence from this study suggests that the information and resource 
flow in HSC can be improved by either replacing traditional in-
termediaries or enhancing the transparency and thus lift the information 
flow and trust between stakeholders. As a consequence, the uncertainty 
in HSC can be decreased, which results in increased efficiencies in terms 
of time and costs bu using blockchain. The second perspective has 
focused on donors, and beneficiaries as the three salient stakeholders in 
HSCs. Donors benefit from the increased transparency as this empowers 
them to track the impact of their donations and increases their ability to 
compare between different NGOs. For beneficiaries, blochcahin offers a 
new infrastructure to access humanitarian services that are more 
dignified and empowering. 


Thus, decreasing them one by one is essential to carry out a suc-
cessful blockchain platform in an organization. The key contributions of 
this study are manyfold. First, the assessment of the barriers to suc-
cessful blockchain adoption is a decision-making process. The key parts 
of this study were drawn from peer-reviewed outlets in the information 
systems and computer science disciplines demonstration of the current 
state of knowledge. This stage was then applied to develop a framework 
to evaluate blockchain adoption barriers across humanitarian sectors. 
Second, the suggested framework can recognize more important barriers 
amongst these barriers for producing results that allow us to evaluate the 
various adoption methods and compare the risks among each of them. 
Additionally, we establish how the derived results could help managers 
to identify the critical barriers for decision-making, and find the best 
practices in implementing this technology as well as improve the 
existing ones. 


The humanitarian sector needs research and development to further 
investigate how blockchain technology can be adapted to address hu-
manitarian challenges. The above use cases are just some of the potential 
barriers of blockchain technology adoption in the sector. Furthermore, 
additional research and evidence are needed to translate these potential 
barriers to actual implementation. Once clear use cases are established 
in other sectors, the humanitarian sector should adapt best practices and 
lessons learned from other sectors to translate the blockchain to hu-
manitarian purpose. 


Our study has some limitations. We acknowledge that the lack of 
peer reviewed academic articles and the number of data sources 
included could be a limitation of the study. Moreover, the theoretical 
nature of the study could also be voiced as a concern. Nevertheless, we 
argue that the infancy of the domain, limited sources of reputed data and 
the lack of theoretical studies on the subject of blockchain adoption 
barriers in humanitarian supply chain make our research worthy in 
terms of contribution. 


CRediT authorship contribution statement 


Iman Ghasemian Sahebi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Re-
sources, Supervision. Behzad Masoomi: Formal analysis, Investigation. 
Shahryar Ghorbani: Writing - review & editing, Validation. 


Acknowledgment 


The authors would like to thank many authors and the respondents, 
professionals for their insights (Mrs. Farzaneh Abouhashem, Mr. Safaie 
Reyneh). The authors are also thankful to anonymous referees for their 
insightful and valuable comments to improve the quality of paper. 


Appendix A. Supplementary data 


Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427. 


References 


[1] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. http://bitcoin.org/bitc 
oin.pdf, 2008. 


[2] S. Underwood, Blockchain beyond Bitcoin, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2016. 
[3] M. Orcutt, “Why Bitcoin Could Be Much More than a Currency.” MIT Technology 


Review, 2015. Retrieved from, https://www.technologyreview.com/s. 
[4] S. Ølnes, Beyond bitcoin enabling smart government using blockchain technology, 


in: International Conference on Electronic Government, 2016, pp. 253–264. 
[5] M. Pilkington, Blockchain technology: principles and applications, in: Research 


Handbook on Digital Transformations, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2016. 
[6] T.T.A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B.C. Ooi, J. Wang, Untangling blockchain: a 


data processing view of blockchain systems, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 30 (7) 
(2018) 1366–1385. 


[7] H. Wu, Z. Li, B. King, Z. Ben Miled, J. Wassick, J. Tazelaar, A distributed ledger for 
supply chain physical distribution visibility, Information 8 (4) (2017) 137. 


[8] P. Santhana, A. Biswas, “Blockchain Risk Management–Risk Functions Need to Play 
an Active Role in Shaping Blockchain Strategy, Deloitte, 2018 available online at: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam. 


[9] T. Riani, Blockchain for Social Impact in Aid and Development, Humanit. Advis. 
Group, 2018. https://humanitarianadvisorygroup.org/blockchain-for-social-impa 
ct-in-aid-and-development/. (Accessed 26 December 2018). 


[10] J. Lindman, V.K. Tuunainen, M. Rossi, “Opportunities and Risks of Blockchain 
Technologies–A Research Agenda, 2017. 


[11] M. Risius, K. Spohrer, A blockchain research framework, Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 59 (6) 
(2017) 385–409. 


[12] A. Apte, Humanitarian Logistics: A New Field of Research and Action, vol. 7, Now 
Publishers Inc, 2010. 


[13] E. Celik, A.T. Gumus, M. Alegoz, A trapezoidal type-2 fuzzy MCDM method to 
identify and evaluate critical success factors for humanitarian relief logistics 
management, J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 27 (6) (2014) 2847–2855. 


[14] G. Galindo, R. Batta, Review of recent developments in OR/MS research in disaster 
operations management, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 230 (2) (2013) 201–211. 


[15] A.M. Caunhye, X. Nie, S. Pokharel, Optimization models in emergency logistics: a 
literature review, Socioecon. Plann. Sci. 46 (1) (2012) 4–13. 


[16] L. Özdamar, M.A. Ertem, Models, solutions and enabling technologies in 
humanitarian logistics, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 244 (1) (2015) 55–65. 


[17] A.L. Coker, et al., “Social and mental health needs assessment of Katrina Evacuees,” 
disaster Manag, Response 4 (3) (2006) 88–94, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
dmr.2006.06.001. 


[18] G. Kovács, K.M. Spens, Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations, Int. J. 
Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 37 (2) (2007) 99–114, https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
09600030710734820. 


[19] P.H. Tatham, K.M. Spens, D. Taylor, Development of the Academic Contribution to 
Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, ” Manag. Res. News, 2009. 


[20] B.M. Beamon, B. Balcik, Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains, 
Int. J. Public Sect. Manag. 21 (1) (2008) 4–25. 


[21] J. Holguín-veras, N. Pérez, M. Jaller, L.N. Van Wassenhove, F. Aros-vera, On the 
appropriate objective function for post-disaster humanitarian logistics models, 
J. Oper. Manag. 31 (5) (2013) 262–280, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jom.2013.06.002. 


[22] R. Oloruntoba, R. Gray, Humanitarian aid: an agile supply chain? Supply Chain 
Manag. An Int. J. 11 (2) (2006) 115–120, https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
13598540610652492. 


[23] N. Altay, W.G. Green, OR/MS research in disaster operations management, Eur. J. 
Oper. Res. 175 (1) (2006) 475–493, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.05.016. 


[24] P. Safran, A strategic approach for disaster and emergency assistance, in: In 5th 
Asian Disaster Reduction Center International Meeting, 2003. 


[25] M. Jahre, L.J. Tore, M. Jahre, L. Jensen, “Theory Development in Humanitarian 
Logistics: a Framework and Three Cases, 2009, https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
01409170910998255. 


[26] M. Ludema, H. Roos, Military and Civil Logistics Support of Humanitarian Relief 
Operations, Minnepolis, 2000. 


[27] S.J. Pettit, A.K.C. Beresford, Emergency relief logistics: an evaluation of military, 
non-military and composite response models, Int. J. Logist. Res. Appl. 8 (4) (2005) 
313–331. 


[28] K. V Natarajan, J.M. Swaminathan, Inventory management in humanitarian 
operations: impact of amount, schedule, and uncertainty in funding, Manuf. Serv. 
Oper. Manag. 16 (4) (2014) 595–603. 


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101427

http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref2

https://www.technologyreview.com/s

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref7

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam

https://humanitarianadvisorygroup.org/blockchain-for-social-impact-in-aid-and-development/

https://humanitarianadvisorygroup.org/blockchain-for-social-impact-in-aid-and-development/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref16

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dmr.2006.06.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dmr.2006.06.001

https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030710734820

https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030710734820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref20

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.06.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.06.002

https://doi.org/10.1108/13598540610652492

https://doi.org/10.1108/13598540610652492

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.05.016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref24

https://doi.org/10.1108/01409170910998255

https://doi.org/10.1108/01409170910998255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref28




Technology in Society 63 (2020) 101427


10


[29] L. Mohan, C. Pellet, M. Cloitre, R. Bonnecaze, Local mobility and microstructure in 
periodically sheared soft particle glasses and their connection to macroscopic 
rheology, J. Rheol. (N. Y. N. Y). 57 (3) (2013) 1023–1046. 


[30] J.L. Epstein, et al., School, Family, and Community Partnerships: Your Handbook 
for Action, Corwin Press, 2018. 


[31] S. Rahman, D.K. Smith, Use of Location-Allocation Models in Health Service 
Development Planning in Developing Nations, ” Elsevier, 2000. 


[32] L. White, H. Smith, C. Currie, OR in developing countries: a review, Eur. J. Oper. 
Res. 208 (1) (2011) 1–11. 


[33] R.G. Wiatt, From the mainframe to the blockchain, Strat. Finance 100 (7) (2019) 
26–35. 


[34] I. Bashir, Mastering Blockchain, Packt Publishing Ltd, 2017. 
[35] D. Tapscott, A. Tapscott, How blockchain will change organizations, MIT Sloan 


Manag. Rev. 58 (2) (2017) 10. 
[36] M. Walport, Distributed Ledger Technology: beyond Block Chain [online], 


Government Office for Science, ”, 2015. 
[37] J. Muhr, T. Laurence, Blockchain Fur Dummies, John Wiley & Sons Incorporated, 


2017. 
[38] M. Swan, Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2015. 
[39] C. Miles, Blockchain security: what keeps your transaction data safe? published on 


IBM, 2017, pp. 14–28. https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/12/blo 
ckchain-security-what-keeps-yourtransaction-data-safe/. 


[40] F. Gaehtgens, A. Allan, “Digital Trust—Redefining Trust for the Digital Era: a 
Gartner Trend Insight Report, 2017. 


[41] K. Purvis, Blockchain: what Is it and what Does it Mean for Development, Guard, 
2017. 


[42] L. Pawczuk, R. Massey, D. Schatsky, “Deloitte’s 2018 Global Blockchain Survey, ” 
Deloitte, 2018. 


[43] A.E. Gencer, On Scalability of Blockchain Technologies, 2017. 
[44] A. Rosic, What Is Blockchain Technology? A Step-by-step Guide for Beginners, 


Blockgeeks. com, 2017. 
[45] D. Schatsky, A. Arora, A. Dongre, Blockchain and the Five Vectors of Progress, 


2018. Deloitte. Avail-able, https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/sign 
alsfor-strategists/value-of-blockchain-applications-interoperability.html. 


[46] J.L. Trujillo, S. Fromhart, V. Srinivas, Evolution of Blockchain Technology: Insights 
from the GitHub Platform, Deloitte Insights, 2017 (Nov. 2017). url, https://www2. 
deloitte.com/insights/us/en/industry/financial-services/evolution-of-blockcha 
in-github-platform.html. 


[47] R. Böhme, Internet protocol adoption: learning from bitcoin, in: IAB Workshop on 
Internet Technology Adoption and Transition (ITAT), 2013, pp. 319–327. 


[48] M. Van Alstyne, Why Bitcoin has value, Commun. ACM 57 (5) (2014) 30–32. 
[49] R. Böhme, N. Christin, B. Edelman, T. Moore, Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and 


governance, J. Econ. Perspect. 29 (2) (2015) 213–238. 
[50] F. Brezo, P.G. Bringas, Issues and Risks Associated with Cryptocurrencies Such as 


Bitcoin, 2012. 
[51] F. Glaser, K. Zimmermann, M. Haferkorn, M.C. Weber, M. Siering, “Bitcoin-asset or 


Currency? Revealing Users’ Hidden Intentions,” Reveal. Users’ Hidden Intentions 
(April 15, 2014), ECIS, 2014. 


[52] A. Urquhart, The inefficiency of Bitcoin, Econ. Lett. 148 (2016) 80–82. 
[53] A. Zohar, “Bitcoin: under the hood,” Commun, ACM 58 (9) (2015) 104–113. 
[54] S. Seebacher, M. Maleshkova, A model-driven approach for the description of 


blockchain business networks, in: In Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2018. 


[55] P. Fairley, The ridiculous amount of energy it takes to run bitcoin, IEEE Spectrum. 
1 (2017) 24–28. Available, https://spectrum.ieee.org/energy/policy/the-ridicu 
lous-amount-ofenergy-it-takes-to-run-bitcoin. 


[56] G. Huberman, J. Leshno, C.C. Moallemi, Monopoly without a monopolist: an 
economic analysis of the bitcoin payment system, Bank Finl. Res. Discuss. Pap. 27 
(2017). 


[57] E.M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, fifth ed., NY Free Press, New York, 2003. 
[58] W.J. Luther, “Cryptocurrencies, network effects, and switching costs,” Contemp, 


Econ. Pol. 34 (3) (2016) 553–571. 
[59] K. Krombholz, A. Judmayer, M. Gusenbauer, E. Weippl, The other side of the coin: 


user experiences with bitcoin security and privacy, in: International Conference on 
Financial Cryptography and Data Security, 2016, pp. 555–580. 


[60] S. Meiklejohn, et al., A fistful of bitcoins: characterizing payments among men with 
no names, in: Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measurement 
Conference, 2013, pp. 127–140. 


[61] J. Bohr, M. Bashir, Who uses bitcoin? an exploration of the bitcoin community, in: 
2014 Twelfth Annual International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust, 
2014, pp. 94–101. 


[62] C. Decker, R. Wattenhofer, “Bitcoin Transaction Malleability and MtGox,” in 
European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, 2014, pp. 313–326. 


[63] M. Andrychowicz, S. Dziembowski, D. Malinowski, Ł. Mazurek, On the malleability 
of bitcoin transactions, in: International Conference on Financial Cryptography and 
Data Security, 2015, pp. 1–18. 


[64] A. Gervais, G.O. Karame, K. Wüst, V. Glykantzis, H. Ritzdorf, S. Capkun, On the 
security and performance of proof of work blockchains, in: Proceedings of the 2016 
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2016, 
pp. 3–16. 


[65] J.J. Xu, Are blockchains immune to all malicious attacks? Financ. Innov. 2 (1) 
(2016) 1–9. 


[66] I. Eyal, E.G. Sirer, Majority is not enough: bitcoin mining is vulnerable, in: 
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, 2014, 
pp. 436–454. 


[67] A. Sapirshtein, Y. Sompolinsky, A. Zohar, Optimal selfish mining strategies in 
bitcoin, in: International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, 
2016, pp. 515–532. 


[68] J. Kokina, R. Mancha, D. Pachamanova, Blockchain: Emergent industry adoption 
and implications for accounting, J. Emerg. Technol. Account. 14 (2) (2017) 
91–100. 


[69] J.C. Dibene, Y. Maldonado, C. Vera, M. de Oliveira, L. Trujillo, O. Schütze, 
“Optimizing the location of ambulances in Tijuana, Mexico,” Comput, Biol. Med. 80 
(2017) 107–113, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.11.016, no. 
November 2016. 


[70] G. Grant, R. Hogan, Bitcoin: risks and controls, J. Corp. Account. Finance 26 (5) 
(2015) 29–35. 


[71] X. Gao, G.D. Clark, J. Lindqvist, Of two minds, multiple addresses, and one history: 
characterizing opinions, knowledge, and perceptions of bitcoin across groups, in: 
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 2016, pp. 1656–1668. 


[72] S. Abramova, R. Böhme, Perceived Benefit and Risk as Multidimensional 
Determinants of Bitcoin Use: a Quantitative Exploratory Study, 2016. 


[73] J.B. Arthur, C.L. Huntley, Ramping up the organizational learning curve: assessing 
the impact of deliberate learning on organizational performance under 
gainsharing, Acad. Manag. J. 48 (6) (2005) 1159–1170, https://doi.org/10.5465/ 
AMJ.2005.19573115. 


[74] J. Yli-Huumo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, K. Smolander, “Where is current research on 
blockchain technology?—a systematic review, PloS One 11 (10) (2016), e0163477. 


[75] H. Vranken, Sustainability of bitcoin and blockchains, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 
28 (2017) 1–9. 


[76] M. Vukolić, The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: proof-of-work vs. BFT 
replication, in: International Workshop on Open Problems in Network Security, 
2015, pp. 112–125. 


[77] L.W. Neuman, Social Research Methods, 6/E. Pearson Education India, 2007. 
[78] R.C. Schmidt, Managing Delphi surveys using nonparametric statistical techniques, 


Decis. Sci. J. 28 (3) (1997) 763–774. 
[79] C.-C. Hsu, B.A. Sandford, The Delphi technique: making sense of consensus, 


Practical Assess. Res. Eval. 12 (1) (2007) 10. 
[80] Y.-L. Hsu, C.-H. Lee, V.B. Kreng, The application of Fuzzy Delphi Method and Fuzzy 


AHP in lubricant regenerative technology selection, Expert Syst. Appl. 37 (1) 
(2010) 419–425. 


[81] R. Mikaeil, Y. Ozcelik, R. Yousefi, M. Ataei, S.M. Hosseini, Ranking the sawability 
of ornamental stone using Fuzzy Delphi and multi-criteria decision-making 
techniques, Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. 58 (2013) 118–126. 


[82] D. Kannan, A.B.L. de Sousa Jabbour, C.J.C. Jabbour, Selecting green suppliers 
based on GSCM practices: using fuzzy TOPSIS applied to a Brazilian electronics 
company, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 233 (2) (2014) 432–447. 


[83] L.A. Zadeh, Fuzzy sets, Inf. Control 8 (3) (1965) 338–353. 
[84] M. Bouzon, K. Govindan, C.M.T. Rodriguez, L.M.S. Campos, Identification and 


analysis of reverse logistics barriers using fuzzy Delphi method and AHP, Resour. 
Conserv. Recycl. 108 (2016) 182–197. 


[85] A. Ishikawa, M. Amagasa, T. Shiga, G. Tomizawa, R. Tatsuta, H. Mieno, The max- 
min Delphi method and fuzzy Delphi method via fuzzy integration, Fuzzy sets Syst 
55 (3) (1993) 241–253. 


[86] Y.-M. Wang, K.-S. Chin, G. K. K. Poon, and J.-B. Yang, “Risk evaluation in failure 
mode and effects analysis using fuzzy weighted geometric mean,” Expert Syst. 
Appl., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 1195–1207, Mar. 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2007.11.028. 


[87] J. Rezaei, Best-worst multi-criteria decision-making method: some properties and a 
linear model, Omega 64 (2016) 126–130. 


[88] A. Mohaghar, I.G. Sahebi, A. Arab, Appraisal of humanitarian supply chain risks 
using best-worst method, Int. J. Soc. Behav. Educ. Econ. Bus. Ind. Eng. 11 (2) 
(2017) 292–297 [Online]. Available: http://waset.org/Publications?p=122. 


[89] I. Ghasemian Sahebi, A. Arab, M.R. Sadeghi Moghadam, Analyzing the barriers to 
humanitarian supply chain management: a case study of the Tehran Red Crescent 
Societies, Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 24 (2017) 232–241, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.05.017, no. November 2016. 


[90] A. Arab, I.G. Sahebi, M. Modarresi, M. Ajalli, A Grey DEMATEL approach for 
ranking the KSFs of environmental management system implementation (ISO 
14001), Calitatea 18 (160) (2017) 115. 


[91] F. Abadi, I. Sahebi, A. Arab, A. Alavi, H. Karachi, Application of best-worst method 
in evaluation of medical tourism development strategy, Decis. Sci. Lett. 7 (1) 
(2018) 77–86. 


[92] J. Rezaei, Best-worst multi-criteria decision-making method, Omega 53 (2015) 
49–57. 


[93] H. Gupta, M.K. Barua, A framework to overcome barriers to green innovation in 
SMEs using BWM and Fuzzy TOPSIS, Sci. Total Environ. 633 (2018) 122–139. 


[94] D. Chen, D. Faibil, M. Agyemang, Evaluating critical barriers and pathways to 
implementation of e-waste formalization management systems in Ghana: a hybrid 
BWM and fuzzy TOPSIS approach, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 1–24 (2020). 


I.G. Sahebi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref38

https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/12/blockchain-security-what-keeps-yourtransaction-data-safe/

https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/12/blockchain-security-what-keeps-yourtransaction-data-safe/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref44

https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/signalsfor-strategists/value-of-blockchain-applications-interoperability.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/signalsfor-strategists/value-of-blockchain-applications-interoperability.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/industry/financial-services/evolution-of-blockchain-github-platform.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/industry/financial-services/evolution-of-blockchain-github-platform.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/industry/financial-services/evolution-of-blockchain-github-platform.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref54

https://spectrum.ieee.org/energy/policy/the-ridiculous-amount-ofenergy-it-takes-to-run-bitcoin

https://spectrum.ieee.org/energy/policy/the-ridiculous-amount-ofenergy-it-takes-to-run-bitcoin

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref68

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.11.016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref72

https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2005.19573115

https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2005.19573115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref87

http://waset.org/Publications?p=122

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.05.017

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.05.017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0160-791X(20)30560-1/sref94


