









See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260030295


A literature and practice review to develop sustainable business model
archetypes


Article  in  Journal of Cleaner Production · February 2014


DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039


CITATIONS


1,562
READS


14,934


4 authors:


Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:


HOMIE Pay per use business model View project


Developing High Value Products from Industrial Waste in Sri Lanka View project


Nancy Bocken


Maastricht University


132 PUBLICATIONS   8,064 CITATIONS   


SEE PROFILE


Samuel William Short


University of Cambridge


19 PUBLICATIONS   2,383 CITATIONS   


SEE PROFILE


P. Rana


Nepal Communitere


29 PUBLICATIONS   2,438 CITATIONS   


SEE PROFILE


Steve Evans


University of Cambridge


190 PUBLICATIONS   6,445 CITATIONS   


SEE PROFILE


All content following this page was uploaded by Samuel William Short on 18 September 2014.


The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.



https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260030295_A_literature_and_practice_review_to_develop_sustainable_business_model_archetypes?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260030295_A_literature_and_practice_review_to_develop_sustainable_business_model_archetypes?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/project/HOMIE-Pay-per-use-business-model?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/project/Developing-High-Value-Products-from-Industrial-Waste-in-Sri-Lanka?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_1&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nancy_Bocken?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nancy_Bocken?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Maastricht_University2?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nancy_Bocken?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Samuel_Short?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Samuel_Short?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/University_of_Cambridge?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Samuel_Short?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/P_Rana2?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/P_Rana2?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/P_Rana2?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Steve_Evans8?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Steve_Evans8?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/institution/University_of_Cambridge?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Steve_Evans8?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Samuel_Short?enrichId=rgreq-24555c9c20be8a5b609f3bb9eedd325b-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDAzMDI5NTtBUzoxNDI4MTEwMTM4NDkwODhAMTQxMTA2MDIwNzc4Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf




Review


A literature and practice review to develop sustainable business model
archetypesq


N.M.P. Bocken*, S.W. Short, P. Rana, S. Evans
University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Institute for Manufacturing, 17 Charles Babbage Road, Cambridge CB3 0FS, United Kingdom


a r t i c l e i n f o


Article history:
Received 19 December 2012
Received in revised form
31 October 2013
Accepted 14 November 2013
Available online 4 December 2013


Keywords:
Business model innovation
Industrial sustainability
Value creation
Stakeholders
Sustainable consumption
Sustainable production


a b s t r a c t


Eco-innovations, eco-efficiency and corporate social responsibility practices define much of the current
industrial sustainability agenda. While important, they are insufficient in themselves to deliver the holistic
changes necessary to achieve long-term social and environmental sustainability. How can we encourage
corporate innovation that significantly changes theway companies operate to ensure greater sustainability?


Sustainable business models (SBM) incorporate a triple bottom line approach and consider a wide
range of stakeholder interests, including environment and society. They are important in driving and
implementing corporate innovation for sustainability, can help embed sustainability into business pur-
pose and processes, and serve as a key driver of competitive advantage.


Many innovative approaches may contribute to delivering sustainability through business models, but
have not been collated under a unifying theme of business model innovation. The literature and business
practice review has identified a wide range of examples of mechanisms and solutions that can contribute
to business model innovation for sustainability. The examples were collated and analysed to identify
defining patterns and attributes that might facilitate categorisation.


Sustainable business model archetypes are introduced to describe groupings of mechanisms and so-
lutions that may contribute to building up the business model for sustainability. The aim of these ar-
chetypes is to develop a common language that can be used to accelerate the development of sustainable
business models in research and practice. The archetypes are: Maximise material and energy efficiency;
Create value from ‘waste’; Substitute with renewables and natural processes; Deliver functionality rather
than ownership; Adopt a stewardship role; Encourage sufficiency; Re-purpose the business for society/
environment; and Develop scale-up solutions.


! 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


1. Background


With prospects of a rising global population, accelerating
global development and associated increasing resource use and
environmental impacts, it seems increasingly apparent that
business as usual is not an option for a sustainable future. The
world is currently using the equivalent of 1.5 planets to support
human activities (WWF, 2012) e an unsustainable rate even at
today’s levels of consumption (Randers, 2012). Awareness of the
need to value ecological systems and natural capital required for
human welfare is not new (Constanza et al., 1997). However, it is
not yet common practice in business to value the e often ‘free’ e


natural assets. A holistic approach is required to tackle the chal-
lenges of a sustainable future: responses to environmental
changes will necessarily need to be in parallel with economic and
social change.


Features of a route to a sustainable economy (developed from
Jackson, 2009) might be:


! A system that encourages minimising of consumption, or im-
poses personal and institutional caps or quotas on energy,
goods, water, etc.;


! A system designed to maximise societal and environmental
benefit, rather than prioritising economic growth;


! A closed-loop system where nothing is allowed to be wasted or
discarded into the environment, which reuses, repairs, and re-
makes in preference to recycling;


! An system that emphasises delivery of functionality and expe-
rience, rather than product ownership;


! A system designed to provide fulfilling, rewarding work expe-
riences for all that enhances human creativity/skills;


q This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-No Derivative Works License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author and source are credited.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ44 (0) 1223 7668207.


E-mail address: nmpb2@cam.ac.uk (N.M.P. Bocken).


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Journal of Cleaner Production


journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/ jc lepro


0959-6526/$ e see front matter ! 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039


Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56































Delta:1_surname

Delta:1_surname

mailto:nmpb2@cam.ac.uk

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039&domain=pdf

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09596526

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039




! A system built on collaboration and sharing, rather than
aggressive competition.


These types of changes require a fundamental shift in the pur-
pose of business and almost every aspect of how it is conducted.
Business model innovation offers a potential approach to deliver
the required change through re-conceptualising the purpose of the
firm and the value creating logic, and rethinking perceptions of
value. The assertion is that with careful business model redesign it
is possible for mainstream businesses to more readily integrate
sustainability into their business and for new start-ups to design
and pursue sustainable business from the outset, as suggested by
Stubbs and Cocklin (2008) and Porter and Kramer (2011), and
business model innovations can support a systematic, on-going
creation of business cases for sustainability (Schaltegger et al.,
2012).


Business model innovation is increasingly recognised as a key to
delivering greater social and environmental sustainability in the
industrial system (e.g. Lüdeke-Freund, 2010). However, under-
standing of sustainable business models and the options available
for innovation for sustainability seems limited at present. While
there is extensive literature on the theory of business models for
delivering sustainability (e.g. Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008 conducted a
literature review), and examples on specific companies (e.g. Xerox,
Canon and Océ ‘pay per copy’models, Baines et al., 2007) there is no
comprehensive view of how firms should approach embedding
sustainability in their business models.


This paper uses a systematic review approach to formalise a
categorisation (the result of a process of dividing the world into
groups of entities whose members share similarity in a given
context, as defined in Jacob, 2004) of business model innovations to
deliver sustainability. This categorisation aims to drive the future
research agenda for sustainable business models by proposing ar-
chetypes for new sustainable business models, and assisting the
process of embedding sustainability into existing industrial models.


In Section 1 the concept and relevancy of sustainable business
models are explained. The gaps in the literature are defined to
highlight the need for the development of a categorisation. This is
followed by an explanation in Section 2 of the iterative method-
ology to develop the categorisation, building on literature and in-
dustrial practice examples, and by using various categorisations. In
Section 3 the proposed categorisation of sustainable business
model archetypes is explained in detail. Eight sustainable business
model archetypes are introduced: Maximise material and energy
efficiency; Create value from ‘waste’; Substitute with renewables
and natural processes; Deliver functionality rather than ownership;
Adopt a stewardship role; Encourage sufficiency; Re-purpose the
business for society/environment; and Develop scale-up solutions.
Section 4 discusses the limitations and potential of these arche-
types, and offers suggestions for future extension of the research.


1.1. What is a business model?


A business model is a conceptual tool to help understand how a
firm does business and can be used for analysis, comparison and
performance assessment, management, communication, and
innovation (Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2005). Business models are
concerned with how the firm defines its competitive strategy
through the design of the product or service it offers to its market,
how it charges for it, what it costs to produce, how it differentiates
itself from other firms by the value proposition, and how the firm
integrates its own value chain with those of other firm’s in a value
network (Rasmussen, 2007). The quality of management is key
because they determine the success of the business model through
their capabilities, ability to acquire, combine and utilise valuable


resources in ways that deliver a value proposition to customers
(Beltramello et al., 2013).


The literature presents various perspectives on the business
model: Margretta’s (2002), Zott and Amit (2010) and Beattie and
Smith (2013) describe business models as a holistic description
on ‘how a firm does business’ and Teece (2010) describes that a
businessmodel articulates how the companywill convert resources
and capabilities into economic value. It is nothing less than the
organisational and financial ‘architecture’ of a business and in-
cludes implicit assumptions about customers, their needs, and the
behaviour of revenues, costs and competitors (Teece, 2010). More
specifically, Osterwalder and Pigneur (2005, 2010) describe a
business model as a series of elements: the value proposition
(product/service offering, customer segments, customer relation-
ships), activities, resources, partners, distribution channels (i.e.
value creation and delivery) and cost structure, and revenue model
(i.e. value capture). Richardson (2008) based on a wide range of
literature, proposes a consolidated view of the components of a
business models as: the value proposition (i.e. the offer and the
target customer segment), the value creation and delivery system,
and the value capture system. Zott and Amit (2010) take an activity-
based perspective, including the selection of activities (‘what’), the
activity system structure (‘how’), and who performs the activities
(‘who’).


In this paper, a business model is defined by three main ele-
ments: the value proposition, value creation and delivery and value
capture (Fig.1). Value creation is at the heart of any business model;
businesses typically capture value by seizing new business oppor-
tunities, newmarkets and new revenue streams (Beltramello et al.,
2013; Teece, 2010). While the value proposition is typically con-
cerned with the product and service offering to generate economic
return, in a sustainable business, the value proposition would
provide measurable ecological and/or social value in concert with
economic value (Boons and Lüdeke-Freund, 2013). Value capture is
about considering how to earn revenues (i.e. capture value) from
the provision of good, services or information to users and cus-
tomers (Teece, 2010).


Business models and business model innovation have received
substantial attention in literature and industry and it is increasingly
suggested that business model innovation is a key to business
success (Chesbrough, 2010; Lüdeke-Freund, 2010; Zott et al., 2011).
With the rising global sustainability pressures, collaboration be-
tween firms and other key stakeholders is becoming more impor-
tant (Lowitt, 2013). Value is no longer created by firms acting
autonomously, but by firms acting together with parties external to
the firm through informal arrangements or formal alliances
(Beattie and Smith, 2013). The business model may be viewed as a
new unit of analysis in business, which takes into account these
collaborative ties (Zott et al., 2011; Beattie and Smith, 2013).


1.2. Why are business models important for sustainability?


Eco-design and eco-efficiency improvements have assisted in
reducing energy, resource intensity, and emissions and waste per


Fig. 1. Conceptual business model framework. Adapted from Richardson (2008);
Osterwalder and Pigneur (2005).


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 43






































unit of production. For instance, Evans et al. (2009) describe cases
of companies, which reduced the energy used to make their
product by over 40% in five years. However, these improvements
have been insufficient to date to offset the rising resource use and
environmental impacts associated with a growing developing
global population. For example, UNEP (2012) found that in the
context of transport, technological improvements to date (e.g. fuel-
efficient vehicles and alternative power sources) have not been
rapid enough to offset the impacts of this growth. Moreover, these
efficiency improvements may lead to increased product and service
use by making these more affordable and accessible, reflecting the
concept of ‘rebound effect’ (Herring and Sorrell, 2009).


Scenarios for 2050 by the UK Department of Energy and Climate
Change (DECC, 2012) target an 80% reduction in GHGs by 2050
compared to 1990. To deliver long-term sustainability on this scale
requires fundamental changes in the global industrial system, and
this necessitates an integrated approach that goes beyond eco-
efficiency initiatives and reconceives how businesses operate.


Sustainable business models can serve as a vehicle to coordinate
technological and social innovations with system-level sustain-
ability. Lüdeke-Freund (2010) describes a sustainable business
model as ‘a business model that creates competitive advantage
through superior customer value and contributes to a sustainable
development of the company and society’. Building on Garetti and
Taisch’s (2012) views on sustainable manufacturing, business
models preserve the environment, while continuing to improve the
quality of human life. Stubbs and Cocklin (2008) assert that sus-
tainable business models use both a systems and firm-level
perspective, build on the triple bottom line approach to define
the firm’s purpose and measure performance, include a wide range
of stakeholders, and consider the environment and society as
stakeholders. Extending this, a sustainable business model aligns
interests of all stakeholder groups, and explicitly considers the
environment and society as key stakeholders.


One of the key challenges is designing business models in such a
way that enables the firm to capture economic value for itself
through delivering social and environmental benefits (Schaltegger
et al., 2012). While efficiency and quality improvements of the
past may have readily translated into profits, it is not always so
clear how delivering social and environmental value might trans-
late into profit and competitive advantage for the firm. Still, the
growing attention to the business model in the literature and
practice suggests this is a useful framework for corporate innova-
tion, and hence may be used to drive sustainability innovation
forward (Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008; Lüdeke-Freund, 2010; Boons
and Lüdeke-Freund, 2013). It seems likely that this field of
research will expand significantly as firms increasingly seek to
identify opportunities to gain competitive advantage in a world
characterised by tightening regulation, contracting resource sup-
plies, climate change effects, and shifting social pressures.


1.3. What is business model innovation for sustainability?


Despite extensive literature on business models, what actually
constitutes a business model innovation is still somewhat ambig-
uous. The literature generally frames business model innovation in
the context of changing the value proposition for the customer.
However, it is more than just changing the product and service
offerings for the customer; business model innovation involves
changing ‘the way you do business’, rather than ‘what you do’ and
hence must go beyond process and products (Amit and Zott, 2012).
Johnson and Suskewicz (2009) suggest business model innovation
represents shifting the focus away from developing individual
technologies towards creating new systems. Furthermore, Sommer
(2012) emphasises that a business model does not only have a


company focus, but involves a wider set of stakeholders, necessi-
tating a broader value-network perspective for innovating and
transforming the business model. This is in line with Beattie and
Smith (2013) and Zott et al. (2011) who describe the business
model as extending beyond the entity of the firm, its customers and
shareholders, and also including value captured for key stake-
holders (e.g. suppliers). Similarly, sustainable business models
capture economic, social and environmental value for a wide range
of stakeholders (Bocken et al., 2013).


Business model innovations for sustainability are defined as:
Innovations that create significant positive and/or significantly
reduced negative impacts for the environment and/or society,
through changes in the way the organisation and its value-network
create, deliver value and capture value (i.e. create economic value)
or change their value propositions.


To tackle the pressing challenges of a sustainable future, in-
novations need to introduce change at the core of the business
model to tackle unsustainability at its source rather than as an add-
on to counter-act negative outcomes of business. The level of
ambition of business model innovations needs to be high and
focused on maximising societal and environmental benefits, rather
than economic gain only. Business model innovations for sustain-
ability may not be economically viable at the start (e.g. as in the
time when the first hybrid car was introduced) but may become so
in the future due to regulatory or other changes. Schaltegger et al.
(2012) propose a typology of defensive, accommodative, and pro-
active business model innovations. Defensive strategies (adjust-
ment) are incremental business model adjustments to protect
current business models focussing on risk and cost reduction often
driven by the need for compliance; accommodative strategies
(improvement, integration) are modifications of internal processes
and include some consideration of environmental or social objec-
tives (e.g. environmental protection), whereas proactive strategies
(full integration) concern the redesign of the core business logic of
the firm for sustainable development. Although all business model
innovations that deliver sustainability are welcomed, proactive
innovation strategies appear most impactful.


1.4. Research gaps and objectives


Potential “sustainable business models” in the literature include
closed-loop business models (Wells and Seitz, 2005), ‘Natural
Capitalism’ (Hawkin et al., 2005), social enterprises (Grassl, 2012),
Product Service Systems (PSS) (Tukker, 2004; Mont and Tukker,
2006) and new economy concepts (e.g. Blue Economy; Pauli,
2010). Other concepts for delivering sustainability can be seen in
practice, but seem to have received little attention in the business
model literature to date. With the exception of some recent liter-
ature (e.g. Boons and Lüdeke-Freund, 2013 who propose a classi-
fication by social, technical and organisational sustainable business
model innovations) few authors have sought to unify the various
examples in literature and practice in a useful categorisation under
the over-arching theme of business model innovation.


The lack of a common source of information on business model
innovations makes it difficult for researchers and practitioners to
gain an overview of the scope of business model innovation for
sustainability. This potentially limits research, education and
training in this subject area, and hence limits practical experi-
mentation and implementation in industry. Furthermore, this re-
stricts the potential for exploitation of synergies between different
types of innovations, so reducing the potential benefits. This is of
particular concern because from practice review it can be seen that
sustainability benefits are often only achieved through combining
several approaches. For instance, implementing a PSS (e.g. car
sharing) without an efficiency focus (e.g. fuel efficiency) is unlikely


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5644














to enhance sustainability, since the vast majority of its environ-
mental impact is in the use phase, not in the manufacturing of the
machine.


A categorisation of sustainable business model archetypes is
developed to describe groupings of mechanisms and solutions that
might contribute to building up the business model for sustain-
ability and identify gaps for future research agenda. The archetypes
seek to create new development paths or a capability to innovate.
Building on the literature (Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008; Bocken et al.,
2013), they need to take a value network or systemic perspective.
This implies moving focus away from individual firms and tech-
nologies, towards creating new systems and generating value
across the value network.


2. Method for categorising the mechanisms for delivering
sustainability


This section discusses how the sustainable business model ar-
chetypes are developed from academic literature and examples in
practice. Fig. 2 visualises the methodology including three iterative
steps: 1. Identification of themes and relevant categorisations from
the literature, 2. Consideration of alternative categorisations and
frameworks suited to define sustainable business model arche-
types, 3. Identification of business model sustainability innovations
from practice. Multiple levels of data collection, categorisation and
coding (iterations to categorise the list of examples in meaningful
ways) were used to triangulate the data. The different sources of
data are coded in a similar way (as suggested by Corbin and Strauss,
1990) taking into account the boundaries and criteria discussed in
Section 2.1.


2.1. Criteria for selection and categorisation of innovation examples


Criteria and boundaries were set to facilitate the process of
collecting innovation examples during the literature and practice


review. Firstly, the main aims of the categorisation of sustainable
business model archetypes are to:


1. Provide a means of categorising and explaining business model
innovations for sustainability


2. Define generic mechanisms for actively assisting the business
model innovation process for sustainability.


3. Define a clearer research agenda for business models for
sustainability


4. Provide exemplars which explain and communicate business
model innovations to businesses to de-risk the business model
innovation process (e.g. through education and workshops)


The archetypes need to be: representative of underlying
mechanisms of transformation in business model innovation, clear
and intuitive, mutually exclusive and explanatory, but not overly
prescriptive. The selection criteria for the examples gathered and
used to develop the archetypes included: Innovations that generate
environmental and/or social benefits in business operations e that
is, change the value proposition to the environment and society.
This may be either through creating new value, or significantly
reducing negative impacts on the environment and society.


While some of the innovation examples selected may not
traditionally be associated with business model innovation, they
are included because they all have the potential to change the value
proposition for one or more stakeholder groups including the
environment and/or society, and hence potentially modify the
business model in some way.


2.2. Literature review e conceptual frameworks for categorising
SBM innovations


The criteria in Section 2.1 were used to add structure to the
literature search. The following academic databases were used for
the literature search: Web of Knowledge, Scopus, EBSCO Host,


Fig. 2. Methodology to develop the SMB archetypes.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 45










ProQuest and SAGE Journals. Key words included variations (e.g.
plural, singular) on terms such as sustainability, business model
(innovation), sustainable business model, sustainability business
model, eco-innovation, green business model, social enterprise,
shared value creation, corporate responsibility, industrial sustain-
ability, sustainable manufacturing, and green manufacturing.


This literature search generated articles on conceptualising
sustainable business models (e.g. Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008), spe-
cific industries (Wells, 2004 on automotive industry), categorising
PSS (Tukker, 2004), categorising social enterprises (Brugmann and
Prahalad, 2007; Yunus et al., 2010; Grassl, 2012), various sustain-
able business model developments in the BRIC countries (Birkin
et al., 2009 on new business models on China; Shrimali et al.,
2011 on stoves in India), sustainable value creation (Hart and
Milstein, 2003), a value network perspective (Allee, 2000; Garetti
and Taisch, 2012; Prescott et al., 2002; Bocken et al., 2013) and
collaborating across the value chain (Romero and Molina, 2011;
Bocken and Allwood, 2012); industrial symbiosis (Chertow, 2000),
and green business models (Høgevold, 2011; Barber et al., 2012).
Earlier overviews which sought to identify unifying research
agendas for sustainability in business include those by Caroll and
Shabana (2010) on the business case for CSR; Dyllick and
Hockerts (2002), Salzmann et al. (2005) and Schaltegger et al.
(2012) on the business case for sustainability; Bisgaard et al.
(2012) on value creation and business models, Beltramello et al.
(2013) on “green’ business models, Wells and Seitz (2005) on
closed loop supply chains, Wells and Bristow (2007) and Lüdeke-
Freund (2009), Boons et al. (2013) and Boons and Lüdeke-Freund
(2013) who looked into business models for sustainability. The
latter two are part of a 2013 special issue in the Journal of Cleaner
Production on sustainable business models.


Major themes from the broad sustainability literature search
were used to develop a list of potential approaches that contribute
to business model innovation for sustainability: Eco-efficiency


improvements (lean,1 cleaner production,2 eco-design3), visions
for a new economy and society (blue economy,4 natural step,5


prosperity without growth6), creating value from waste (recy-
cling, closed loop, and industrial symbiosis7), product service sys-
tems,8 and social enterprise solutions.9 As additional business
model examples from literature and practice were explored this list
was refined and extended to better categorise the discrete mech-
anisms seen.


The authors evaluated whether existing conceptual frameworks
found in the literature could be used as a basis for categorisation of
SBM innovations. Various approaches for categorising the mecha-
nisms were explored, based on various pre-existing frameworks
from the sustainability, manufacturing, business model and inno-
vation literature. These included the three pillars of sustainability,
which in a business context Elkington (1997) defines as the Triple-
Bottom-Line (Economic, Environmental, and Social). Various busi-
ness model frameworks were explored including Richardson’s
(2008) definition (Value Proposition, Value creation and delivery,
and Value capture), and the more detailed Osterwalder and
Pigneur’s (2010) business model building blocks (Customers, Re-
lationships, Value proposition, Delivery Channels, Key Resources,
Key Activities, Key Partners, Cost Structure, Revenue Streams).
Additional frameworks considered were the value-chain perspective
(e.g. UNEP, 2008) (e.g. Extraction, R&D, Procurement, Production,


Table 1
Example categorisation of one of the coding exercises for “Encourage sufficiency”.


Business model
archetype


Primary business
model innovation


Industry example Potential mechanism for delivering
sustainability


Main sustainability benefit


Consumer/user
education


Value proposition Labelling. For instance: product
nutritional traffic lights, energy
star efficiency, carbon
footprinting.


Encourage more sustainable use of
products e health, energy usage.


Social, Environmental and long-term
Economic


Demand
Management
and Cap & Trade


Value proposition Energy Service Companies
(ESCOs) e most examples stem
from the public sector
(buildings); work on green
business models (FORA, 2010;
Loughran and Kulick, 2004)


Quota restrictions; Restricted
advertising and promotion; Providing
incentives to reduce consumption. The
provider optimises companies and
public buildings and in return gets paid
by part of the savings achieved.


Environmental, Social (Health, Debt)


‘Slow-Fashion’ Value proposition Vitsoe shelving solutions, Louis
Vuitton signature handbags


Deliberate strategy to slow the fast
efashion cycle, by not constantly
introducing cosmetic innovation and
encouraging greater longevity in use.


Social, Environmental


Longevity Value proposition Rolex, Mont-Blanc Design for maximised product life
(minimise price/year of life)


Social, Environmental


‘Premium’ branding Value proposition Patagonia clothing, Vitsoe,
Luxury brands (Chouinard and
Stanley, 2012)


Quality, restricted production volumes,
high price to material content ration,
service proposition included in upfront
pricing, little or no discounting. This
could facilitate reduced consumption
and encourage longevity in use.


Environmental, Economic


Frugal business Value proposition,
value creation and
delivery


Solar cooking systems and
other simple off-grid solutions.
Health services in rural areas
(Esposito et al., 2012)


Doing more with less. Social, Environmental


Responsible
promotion


Value creation,
delivery


Patagonia clothing partnership
with EBay.
Vitsoe shelving (Evans et al.,
2009)


Only sell what is needed.
Avoiding discounting and price
dumping.
No sales commissions.


Social, Environmental, Economical


1 See for instance Shah and Ward (2003).
2 See for instance Fresner (1998).
3 See for instance Baumann et al. (2002); Bocken et al. (2011).
4 See Pauli (2010).
5 Robèrt (2008).
6 Jackson (2009).
7 See for instance Chertow (2000).
8 See Baines et al. (2007).
9 See Grassl (2012).


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5646










Distribution, Sales, Marketing, Service, Disposal), and value-network
or Stakeholder perspective (e.g. Stubbs and Cocklin, 2008) (Investors,
Customers, Distributors, Partners and Suppliers, Employees, Envi-
ronment, Community, Government). However, it was found that
these do not really help for categorisation, nor do they provide a
framework for guiding future innovation activities. This is because of
the nature of business model innovations for sustainability e they
generally span multiple pillars of sustainability, impact multiple
building blocks of the business model, and impact multiple stages of
the value chain and stakeholders throughout the value network - all
stakeholders involved or affected in the creation, delivery and
consumption of products/services (Bocken et al., 2013). Innovation
frameworks were also explored such as Mercier-Laurent (2011)
innovation strategy, and the more recent business model innova-
tion framework proposed by Boons and Lüdeke-Freund (2013)
(Technological innovation, Organisational innovation, Social inno-
vation). Categorisation based on innovation provedmore effective in
understanding the underlying mechanisms within the business
model innovations, which led to a preliminary classification of
Product/service, Process, Network and Social Innovation (based on
Mercier-Laurent, 2011). This has some similarities with the work of
Boons and Lüdeke-Freund (2013). Ultimately, it was decided to use
their slightly more generic framework of technological, social and
organisational innovation as a high-level categorisation. However, a
more detailed categorisation was found to be necessary for the
objectives of this research.


2.3. Identifying (sustainable) business model examples from
practice


The literature search confirmed the lack of an extensive cate-
gorisation of sustainable business model archetypes. In some cases,
industrial practice appears to be ahead of academia in exploring
and developing novel business models. Hence, examples from
practice were a crucial addition. During the practice and grey
literature search, new keywords were identified and additional
searches were conducted in the academic databases on these
keywords.


To identify sustainable business models developed in practice, a
review of secondary literature on practice was conducted. Indus-
trial practice in (sustainable) business model development was
investigated, by exploring:


1. Sustainability rankings;
2. Websites of organisations involved in industrial sustainability


(e.g. UNEP, WBCSD); and
3. Case studies on business models and sustainable business


models (SBM).


Sustainability rankings such as Corporate Knights top 100, the
Guardian Green and Sustainable Business Awards, the Dow sus-
tainability index, and Forbes top 100 sustainability leaders provide
indicators of potential exemplary performance in sustainability.
None of the rankings specifically look at business model innovation,
and many of the firms do not seem to be undertaking radical, if any,
business model innovations for sustainability to date. Many of the
rankings are based on the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) or
similar sets of indicators. On the whole, the rankings tend to focus
on relatively narrow ranges of indicators such as carbon emissions
and water use, social indicators such as health and safety and other
employee related measures, corporate governance ratings, and CSR
contributions. Nonetheless, the rankings did highlight interesting
examples that were subsequently reviewed through corporate
websites and sustainability reports. We identified examples of
initiatives in areas such as: Fair-trade, Social enterprises and Benefit


(B-) corporations, and Eco-innovation. These examples were added
to our list of examples if they met the criteria in Section 2.1.


Websites of leading organisations in the fields of sustainability
and sustainable development such as WBCSD and UNIDO, World
Bank, UNEP and major INGOs, were surveyed for examples of
business model innovation for sustainability. This generated similar
results to assessment of sustainability rankings. Several UK orga-
nisations working on promoting exploration of business models for
sustainability were also surveyed (e.g. Forum for the Future,
WRAP). These searches for instance yielded insights into emerging
models based on collaboration.


The grey literature of popular press provides numerous exam-
ples of business model innovation for sustainability, such as
Chouinard and Stanley (2012), Tukker (2008) and Esty andWinston
(2009), Anderson and White (2011), Pauli et al. (2010) and Senge
et al. (2008). These help to clarify perceived exemplary firms for
sustainability. An on-going OECD funded project on green business
models was also used as a comprehensive source of information on
emerging models for environmental sustainability (FORA, 2010).


The practice review led to additional academic literature data-
base searches. New search terms included “demand management”,
“ethical sourcing”, “social enterprise”, “b-corporation”, “industrial
symbiosis”, “product service systems”, “take-back management”,
“closed-loop models”, “circular economy”, and “frugal business
models” amongst others.


2.4. Development of archetypes based on literature and practice
(coding)


To address shortcomings of alternative categorisations from the
literature, a deeper categorisation of sustainable business model
archetypes is introduced to explain different mechanisms for
delivering sustainability.


The authors used coding of the examples generated from
practice and literature to develop the archetypes. The analysis and
generation of important themes and categorisations as suggested
by Corbin and Strauss (1990), makes use of constant comparisons
for similarities and differences, to achieve precision and consis-
tency. Both theoretical coding, which uses higher level literature
themes (in particular the categorisations from Section 2.2 such as
the social, technological and organisational classification by Boons
and Lüdeke-Freund, 2013), and open coding which uses lower level
codes (e.g. specific company innovation initiatives), which are be-
ing grouped into higher level codes were used to develop the ar-
chetypes (Corbin and Strauss, 1990). The lower level codes were
regularly compared to higher-level codes (themes from the litera-
ture and practice). As part of this process, the authors conducted
rounds of individual coding followed by joint discussion to un-
derstand the reasoning behind the categorisations. This process
was repeated until agreement and saturation was reached on the
final sustainable business model archetype categorisation. Table 1
includes a snapshot of one of the coding exercises, used to
develop the archetypes. The more complete list of coding examples
is available upon request from the authors.


A list of eight archetypes, explained in Section 3, was eventually
developed, after saturation of the coding process (no new themes
or categorisations being identified).


3. Results: the sustainable business model archetypes


This section explains the sustainable business model archetypes
developed in this paper (Fig. 3). The archetypes are classified in
higher order groupings, which describe the main type of business
model innovation: Technological, Social, and Organisational oriented
innovations. This builds on the categorisation by Boons and Lüdeke-


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 47






Freund (2013), which were found to be the most helpful in defining
descriptive groupings. The technical grouping includes archetypes
with a dominant technical innovation component (e.g.
manufacturing process and product redesign); the social grouping
includes archetypes with a dominant social innovation component
(e.g. innovations in consumer offering, changing consumer behav-
iour) while archetypes in the organisational grouping have a domi-
nant organisational innovation change component (e.g. changing the
fiduciary responsibility of the firm). These high-level groupings are


indicative for the dominant areas of innovation, although they are
often paired with other innovations. In the following sections, each
of the eight archetypes is discussed in detail.


3.1. Maximise material productivity and energy efficiency


Definition: Do more with fewer resources, generating less
waste, emissions and pollution. Fig. 4 shows the ‘Maximisematerial
productivity and energy efficiency’ archetype.


Fig. 4. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Maximise material and energy efficiency’.


Fig. 3. The sustainable business model archetypes.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5648






3.1.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
This archetype encompasses an existing theme from the


manufacturing sector, and the foundation of much of the existing
work on industrial sustainability e that of maximising material
productivity, resource efficiency and waste reduction. This arche-
type is distinct from mere process innovation in the sense that
‘maximisingmaterial and energy efficiency’ should run through the
entire business and subsequently enhance the value proposition
(e.g. through significant price reductions).


As resource constraints become more acute, and energy prices
increase, focus on this archetype is only likely to increase. This
archetype captures concepts such as lean, eco-efficiency, and
cleaner production approaches, which seek to improve resource
efficiency and reduce waste and emissions through product and
process redesign. There are numerous examples in industry of how
this archetype has enabled alignment between environmental and
economic objectives of the firm (Gupta and Benson, 2011; Hawken
et al., 2005; Weizsäcker et al., 1997).


This archetype seeks to mitigate environmental impact of in-
dustry by reducing the demand for energy and resources so
reducing demand for primary extraction and resource depletion,
and reducing waste and emissions (waste to land-fill, CO2, and
other polluting emissions). In doing so, this archetype contributes
towards system-wide reduction of resource consumption.


Efficiency in material and energy use should always be an
important objective, but the fact that it generates rebound effects
(Herring and Sorrell, 2009) when used in isolation is a major issue.
In addition, productivity improvements and efficiency improve-
ments have eliminated traditional jobs inmanufacturing, leading to
unemployment and associated social sustainability issues (Ashford
et al., 2012). Hence, other archetypes would also need to be
considered and employed.


3.1.2. Examples
Lean manufacturing is a well-established philosophy that iden-


tifies and seeks to minimise waste in production processes (Shah
and Ward, 2003; Melton, 2005). Waste in this context is not only
seen in the physical waste materials and waste energy, but also in
over-production, materials handling, over-processing, inventory,
defects and rework. The focus of lean has achieved substantial
improvements in energy and material efficiencies and productivity
improvements. Examples such as the Toyota production system
(Womack and Jones, 2003) epitomise the integration of lean
thinking throughout the business. Cleaner production concepts
build on this, and specifically focus on waste and emissions re-
ductions from production processes.


Factor 4 and Natural Capitalism (Hawken et al., 2005;Weizsäcker
et al., 1997) have a more specific focus on sustainability and the
need for more radical transformation in energy efficiency and


material productivity for sustainability, rather than small incre-
mental improvements. The suggestion is that 4 times efficiency
improvements, or even 10 times efficiency improvements may be
possible through more radical redesign of products and production
processes.


3.2. Create value from ‘waste’


Definition: The concept of ‘waste’ is eliminated by turning waste
streams into useful and valuable input to other production and
making better use of under-utilised capacity. Fig. 5 shows the
‘create value from waste’ archetype.


3.2.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
Seeking to improve efficiency and minimise waste and emis-


sions may often be the best approach, but in some cases may mean
that opportunities for complementary value creation are missed.
This second archetype is distinct from the efficiency archetype, in
that rather than seeking to reduce waste to a minimum, it seeks to
identify and create new value from what is currently perceived as
waste. This approach has similarities with the natural world, where
the concept of waste does not really exist because all ‘waste’
products become food stock for another natural kingdom (Boons
and Lambert, 2002; Gibbs and Deutz, 2007).


This archetype seeks to reduce environmental impact of industry
by reducing the continuous demand for resources, by closing ma-
terial loops and using waste streams as useful inputs to other
products and processes, so reducing demand for primary extraction
and resource depletion, and reducing waste to landfill and emis-
sions. In doing so, this archetype contributes towards improved
resource efficiency. However, to achieve greater system-level
impact, the speedof newproduct introductionsneeds tobe reduced.


3.2.2. Examples
Industrial symbiosis, is a process orientated solution turning


waste outputs from one process into feedstock for another process
or product line (Ayres and Simonis, 1994; Chertow, 2000). One of
the most well-known examples of industrial symbiosis is the in-
dustrial park Kalundborg (Chertow, 2000).


Closed-loop business models (Winkler, 2011) include products
and business processes designed in a manner that enables waste at
the end of the use phase of a product to be used to create new value.
An example of moving towards closed loop business model is the
Interface Flor providing office floor carpet tiles (Anderson and
White, 2011).


Cradle-to-Cradle (McDonough and Braungart, 2002) in-
corporates the idea of a closed loop technical nutrient cycle with a
biological open-loop cycle. The latter acknowledges that it is not
always possible to recapture materials lost during the production


Fig. 5. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Create value from ‘waste’’


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 49






and use phase, and in such instances these waste streams and
emissions should be designed so that they are benign to the envi-
ronment and preferably contributing positive nutrients to the
natural environment, creating positive value for the environment.


Under-utilised assets and capabilities as a form of wasted value
might be re-captured through sharing e shared ownership, and
collaborative consumption approaches. Examples of collaborative
consumption approaches being used to radically reduce material
throughput are emerging such as peer-to-peer car sharing and local
community peer-to-peer electrical power tool sharing schemes.


3.3. Substitute with renewables and natural processes


Definition: Reduce environmental impacts and increase busi-
ness resilience by addressing resource constraints ‘limits to growth’
associated with non-renewable resources and current production
systems. Fig. 6 shows the ‘Substitute with renewables and natural
processes’ archetype.


3.3.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
Whereas resource efficiency improvements and ‘creating value


from waste’ are examples of innovations delivering environmental
impact reduction, these approaches do not explicitly consider the
potential of renewable resources, and deriving benefits from
nature-inspired innovations, which may allow for significant leaps
in environmental impact improvement. This archetype builds on
concepts such as the Blue economy and the Zero Emissions (ZERI)
(Pauli, 2010), Biomimicry (Benyus, 2002), The Natural Step (Robèrt,
2008), concerned with the potential for humanity to live within
current resource constraints, by making better use of renewable
resources or drawing inspiration from processes occurring in
nature.


This archetype seeks to reduce environmental impact of in-
dustry by substitution with renewable resources and natural pro-
cesses to create significantly more environmentally benign
industrial processes. It contributes to the wider need of reducing
the use of the planet’s finite resource supply and reducing un-
wanted waste and pollution.


3.3.2. Examples
Substitution with renewable (non-finite) resources: This spans


options from substitution of finite materials with renewable ma-
terials, such as replacing metals with natural and fibre-based ma-
terials, through to system-level renewable power generation
systems. In many cases, these technologies and systems already
exist, yet are currently not economically viable, or cannot be made
efficiently at volume. As production systems evolve or regulations
and incentive structures change, such technologies and systems


may become more affordable, which may open up business model
innovation opportunities (e.g. recent widespread uptake of solar
photovoltaic panels).


Local renewable energy solutions: This includes solutions such as
solar electricity provision in developing markets (e.g. for light,
cookers), and using onsite windmills and solar to generate elec-
tricity for manufacturing processes (manufacturing examples are
included Evans et al., 2009).


Environmentally benign materials and production processes: This
is a broad area of innovation from replacing chemical dyes with
organic/benign dyes in textile production, through to more radical
change such as the emerging field of ‘green chemistry’ that seeks to
utilise naturally occurring processes in place of traditional indus-
trial processes. For example, seeking to replicate how spiders
weave exceptionally strong webs using only organic materials and
ambient pressure and temperatures, rather than the typical in-
dustrial processes that involve high energy inputs to deliver tem-
perature and pressure, and environmentally damaging chemicals
and acids.


3.4. Deliver functionality, rather than ownership


Definition: Provide services that satisfy users’ needs without
having to own physical products. Fig. 7 shows the ‘deliver func-
tionality, rather than ownership’ archetype.


3.4.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
This archetype is based on the literature on Product Service


Systems (PSS) and Servitisation (e.g. Goedkoop et al., 1999; Tukker,
2004), which is concerned with how companies shift the business
model from offering a manufactured product to offering a combi-
nation of products and services. The product is still important, but
customer experience is fundamental to the offering or value
proposition. Product service systems span a continuum from
mainly product through to mainly service content (Tukker, 2004).


This archetype is about shifting substantially towards the pure
service model e that is, delivering functionality on a pay-per-use
basis, rather than selling ownership of a product. In doing so, this
may fundamentally change thematerial throughput requirements of
the industrial system. The literature suggests the following potential
benefits of such an approach, which result from better alignment of
the customer’s (and societies) needs with that of the manufacturer:


! Breaks the link between profit and production volume (but
probably not usage volume)


! Can reduce resource consumption
! Motivation and opportunity to deal with through-life and end-
of-life issues as the manufacturer retains ownership of assets


Fig. 6. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Substitute with renewables and natural processes’.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5650






! Enhanced efficiency in use
! Enhanced product longevity/durability
! Reuse of materials


This archetype has the potential to change consumption patterns,
in particular by reducing the need for product ownership. In addition,
it may incentivisemanufacturers to develop products that last longer
and design for upgradability and reparability, potentially reducing
resource use. However, literature and practice indicate that Product
Service Systems and models are not inherently more eco-efficient
(Mont and Tukker, 2006) and consumers are unsure whether they
will live up to their expectations (Catulli, 2012). Careful attention to
detail is required to realise the benefits, Such business model inno-
vation generally needs to be married with efficiency and value in
waste innovations. In addition, to achievegreater system-level impact,
product and service usage volume would also need to be mitigated.


3.4.2. Examples
An often-quoted results-oriented PSS is Xerox Inc’s provision of


photocopiers and services (Baines et al., 2007). The Xerox docu-
ment management system is based on customer payment per print
or copy, which could dis-incentivise printing. An often quoted use-
oriented PSS example is car sharing (e.g. lease) while maintenance
contracts and extended warranties are examples of product oriented
PSS (Tukker, 2004).


3.5. Adopt a stewardship role


Definition: Proactively engaging with all stakeholders to ensure
their long-term health and well-being. Fig. 8 shows the ‘adopt a
stewardship role’ archetype.


3.5.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
This archetype seeks to maximise the positive societal and


environmental impacts of the firm on society by ensuring long-term


health and wellbeing of stakeholders (including society and the
environment). Through their business models, firms actively seek to
contribute to sustaining and developing the well-being of their
value networks. To In doing so, this archetype contributes partially
towards the systemic objective to create a flourishing society and
planet (Jackson, 2009). Again, the archetype would benefit from a
combination with other archetypes (e.g. create value from waste).


3.5.2. Examples
Upstream stewardship examples include theMarine Stewardship


Council (MSC, 2012), the Forestry Stewardship Council (FSC, 2012)
and the Better Cotton Initiative. Features of such business models
are often a supplier accreditation programme that drives more
ethical or sustainable business practices at the grass-roots level
(often in developing nations). The programmes might deliver
environmental and social sustainability initiatives such as:


! Employee welfare and living wages
! Community development: Education, health, livelihoods
! Sustainable growing and harvesting of food and other crops,
minimising chemical fertilisers and pesticides, water con-
sumption, and top soil erosion


! Environmental resource and bio-diversity protection and
regeneration


Typically, the consumer pays a price premium to fund benefits
in the supply chain, motivated by the intangible value associated
with such purchasing. The models generally appeal to consumer
values, engaging the consumer in the supply-chain issues, rather
than the retailer or manufacturer funding the premium (Fairtrade,
2011). Once such certifications reach critical mass (e.g. FSC), they
could entirely displace non-certified products. Retailer Kingfisher
(2012) has committed to FSC certified wood sourcing and proac-
tively seek to replace more trees than are consumed to offset
damage done collectively by industry over the past decades. This


Fig. 8. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Adopt a stewardship role’.


Fig. 7. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Deliver functionality, rather than ownership’.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 51






generates their so-called ‘net-positive’ impact for the environment
(Kingfisher, 2012), which potentially defines a newmodel for future
sustainability. Public spending guidelines can play an important
role in facilitating such a shift.


Downstream stewardship examples include proactively tackling
the health issues of consumers. This is particularly relevant in the
food, beverage and tobacco sectors, where health issues are arising
due to modern diets and over-consumption, combined with
increasingly sedentary life-styles. The food and beverage sector
therefore has an opportunity to enhance public health through
actively encouraging a more healthy diet. Major retailers have
already attempted this through ‘choice editing’ (Bocken and
Allwood, 2012) whereby poor products are removed from their
shelves. Manufacturers might extend this concept to their own
production lines, eliminating products that are less healthy or more
environmentally damaging. Legislation such as the EU directive on
Energy using products has forced manufacturers to increasingly
take responsibility for offering energy efficient products. This be-
comes a business model innovation when it creates a differenti-
ating value proposition to customers through the offer of a
healthier life or reduced energy bills. If value is perceived in
reducing national health care costs or customers’ energy and water
bills, this will positively influence the product offering decisions
towards environmentally and socially better products.


3.6. Encourage sufficiency


Definition: Solutions that actively seek to reduce consumption
and production. Fig. 9 shows the ‘encourage sufficiency’ archetype.


3.6.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
A growing body of academics and NGOs argue that radical


reduction in consumption and fundamental changes in Western
economic models are the only solution for a sustainable future
(Ehrenfeld, 2008; Jackson, 2009). Proponents of such change argue
that current initiatives solely focused on the production (supply-
side) are insufficient to outweigh the negative impacts of an
increasingly unsustainable Western way of living (e.g. Jackson,
2009). More radical approaches are required to actively seek to
reduce consumption.


The sufficiency archetype aims to address this, by tackling sus-
tainability from the perspective of sustainable consumption. Of
particular relevance in developing the sufficiency-based business
model is the reframing of the value proposition to better address
the broader range of stakeholders in a firm. Furthermore, the suf-
ficiency approach should inform the appropriate use of advertising,
sales and growth targets. On a systems level, this could reduce over-
consumption, and hence material and energy throughputs.


3.6.2. Examples
Energy Saving Companies (ESCOs) optimise energy consumption


of companies and public buildings and in return get paid by part of
the savings achieved (FORA, 2010). In the household energy sector,
utility providers are incentivised through subsidies to assist con-
sumers in reducing their energy consumption: both producer and
consumer are financially incentivised to reduce consumption
(Loughran and Kulick, 2004). However, the benefits to a firm for
actively engaging in demand-side management could be numerous
- reputational benefit, risk reduction, avoiding scale-up costs.
Government and regulation of course play a key role in driving
sustainable consumption (Schrader and Thøgersen, 2011). Extend-
ing this concept to other forms of consumption is challenging, but
has significant potential to reduce material and energy intensity of
modern societies.


Product durability and longevity through product redesign
potentially slows product replacement cycles. Furthermore, a
change in the culture of fast fashion could significantly reduce
excessive consumption and premature disposal of useful products.
Companies such as Vitsoe (Evans et al., 2009) already disassociate
themselves with fast fashion but this business model is not yet
widespread.


Market places for second-hand goods create an incentive for
owners to takemore care of products to ensure higher second-hand
value. Second-handmarkets in automobiles arewell developed, but
platforms such as e-bay have extended this significantly. Patagonia
clothing for instance, have recently established an e-bay based
store to facilitate second-hand clothing trade rather than discard-
ing the products, or leaving them unused in storage (Chouinard and
Stanley, 2012). Likewise, manufacturers and retailers can also go
further in encouraging greater sufficiency in the use phase of
products and services by providing information on how to mini-
mise usage impacts. Unilever’s for instance advises consumers of
the benefits of using washing detergents at low temperatures and
encourages consumers to take shorter showers (Rubik and Scholl,
2009).


Frugal business models typically focus on provision of products
and services to low-income markets, often in extreme poverty. The
business models take complex product concepts and redesign them
to pare down to their base functionality. This involves eliminating
superfluous or overly complex functionality and cosmetic features,
to provide products that use minimal materials and energy at
minimal costs (Karamchandani et al., 2011). Given their target
markets, such models are often conceived within social enterprise
solutions, but this need not be the case. Various authors have
highlighted the potentially lucrative markets associated with the
bottom of the pyramid (e.g. Esposito et al., 2012; Yunus et al., 2010).
Whether or not frugal business models lead to sustainability


Fig. 9. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Encourage sufficiency’.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5652






improvement depends on other aspects of the business, such as
product quality. However, the concept of stripping products back to
basic fundamentals could reduce the material and energy
throughput, although it counteracts the drive for continuous
improvement and endless demand for novelty in the developed
world.


3.7. Re-purpose the business for society/environment


Definition: Prioritizing delivery of social and environmental
benefits rather than economic profit (i.e. shareholder value) max-
imisation, through close integration between the firm and local
communities and other stakeholder groups. The traditional busi-
ness model where the customer is the primary beneficiary may
shift. Fig. 10 shows the ‘Re-purpose the business for society/envi-
ronment’ archetype.


3.7.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
Between traditional business approaches and social enterprises


several other innovations can be seen in practice that potentially
enhance the social value proposition of the firm significantly while
also influencing other aspects of the firm’s business model. This
archetype focuses on the changing fiduciary duty and structure of a
firm for social and environmental (rather than economic and
shareholder) benefits maximisation of an organisation and groups
concepts that collectively see firms integrating more fully with
their stakeholders.


On a systems level, this archetype could contribute to
changing the fundamental purpose of businesses to deliver
environmental and societal benefits, and therefore drive global,
economy-wide change. Global policy framework changes,
allowing for these companies to achieve scale without the need
to maximise shareholder value, would increase the impact of this
archetype.


3.7.2. Examples
Awell-established area of research in the sustainable and social


development fields is that of social enterprises. Grassl (2012) sug-
gests that the distinction of social entrepreneurship is in the value
proposition itself, or in other words, the core of the business model.
Social enterprises exist to fulfil a specific social mission. They are
‘for-profit’ enterprises, but the profit motive is secondary to de-
livery of the social mission; hence they are not generally profit-
maximising. Grassl (2012) suggests that business models for so-
cial enterprises must fulfil the following conditions as a minimum:


! Driven by a social mission;
! Generate positive externalities (spill overs) for society;
! Recognise the centrality of the entrepreneurial function;


! Achieve competitiveness on markets through effective planning
and management.


Grassl (2012) identifies a broad range of organisations that
might fulfil these conditions such as entrepreneur support models
and organisational support models. Micro-finance and
manufacturing enterprises serving regions of extreme poverty are
examples of social enterprises (Yunus et al., 2010).


Non-profit organisations might deliver similar benefits to social
enterprises but differ in that they do not seek to make a profit. The
funding structure typically depends on external donors, which can
present challenges for long-term economic viability. While there
are successful examples of these models delivering one-off projects
or initiatives, this model is less well suited to long-term continuous
business operations.


A partial solution is the ‘Hybrid’ business model, whereby two
business entities co-exist, one operating as a traditional for-profit
business, but using part of the profit stream to finance a second
not-for-profit enterprise. Although this does not embed sustain-
ability into the core of the primary business, it can offer significant
benefits.


3.8. Develop scale-up solutions


Definition: Delivering sustainable solutions at a large scale to
maximise benefits for society and the environment. Fig. 11 shows
the ‘Develop scale-up solutions’ archetype.


3.8.1. Why it was selected as an archetype
This archetype is introduced to consider the scale-up and


widespread presence of business models for sustainability.
Emerging examples of businesses are being built on sound


sustainability principles using combinations of the aforementioned
archetypes. Albeit positive, these are often small scale. Their sus-
tainability principles (particularly those that encourage sufficiency
and social enterprises) may limit their attraction to mainstream
investors, and may inhibit aggressive growth strategies. This seems
to represent a challenge for sustainability in general e to achieve
scale where firms might make a significant difference to environ-
mental and social sustainability on a global level. This archetype is
introduced to specifically consider the scale-up of business models
for sustainability.


Largemultinationals may be better placed to drive sustainability
at scale, and ultimately they will almost certainly play a significant
role once concepts are proven and competition forces them to
change direction. However, in the nearer term, it is likely to be new
start-ups and small businesses undertaking the more radical in-
novations (Nerkar and Shane, 2003; Giarratana, 2004), and these
need innovative strategies to go to scale.


Fig. 10. Sustainable business model archetype ‘Re-purpose the business for society/environment’. Note. Value capture builds on Jackson (2009).


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 53






3.8.2. Examples
Well-documented approaches such as franchising (Dant et al.,


2011) and licensing may enable rapid replication with localised
adaptation and local financing, without the need for the founders to
finance and manage directly all operations.


Collaborative models to rapidly scale up include peer-to-peer
models, crowd-sourcing (Brabham, 2008), and open innovation
(Bocken and Allwood, 2012; Chesbrough and Crowther, 2006).
These all seek to bring like-minded individuals, firms, and in-
vestors, together to drive adoption of business ideas and have the
potential to radically change consumption patterns across the
world, and radically influence production models. The Internet is
proving to be a powerful enabler of such new innovative scale up
approaches.


4. Discussion


This paper provides an approach, through the categorisation of
eight businessmodel archetypes, for linking the theoretical concept
of business model innovation to the practical transformation
mechanisms emerging for delivering industrial sustainability. The
archetypes have the potential to embed sustainability into business
purpose and processes, increase the ambition of innovations,
accelerate their introduction and reduce risks of implementation
through providing exemplars from practice. The purpose of this
categorisation is not only to reduce social and environmental
negatives but also to assist in fundamentally reconceiving the
business model to deliver sustainability.


Firms can use one or a selection of business model archetypes
for shaping their own transformation, which are envisaged to
provide assistance in exploring new ways to create and deliver
sustainable value and developing the business model structure by
providing guidance to realise the new opportunities. Although each
can be applied in isolation, different archetypes may be combined
and real sustainability almost certainly demands combinations of
archetypes (e.g. deliver functionality rather than ownership, while
maximisingmaterial and energy efficiency). The archetypes may be
used as exemplars in a workshop setting with industry. Companies
when brainstorming to develop new sustainable business model
ideasmay draw inspiration from each of the archetypes, a creativity
process which has been well received, during exploratory industry
workshops conducted by the authors. Preliminary testing in
workshop settings (workshops with various industry partners and
with engineering students) has demonstrated the value of such an
approach in stimulating innovative thinking. Work and trials are
on-going to refine and validate the business model archetypes to
further enhance the innovation process.


The research process identified emerging themes in the study
of sustainable business models, including: the role of role of


technology advancement and level of innovation, the application of
a systems perspective, introducing innovative approaches to
collaboration, and the need for education and raising awareness to
facilitate successful adoption of sustainable business models.
Technology innovation can drive new business model innovation
(e.g. cheaper solar technologies and the use of solar cookers in
developing countries) and vice versa. Second, concepts such as the
Blue Economy (Pauli, 2010) and systems thinking (Senge et al.,
2008) are concerned with expanding the systems boundaries
considered needed to address global challenges. For example, are
biofuels, which affect food supplies and biodiversity a sustainable
option? Third, companies are increasingly collaborating with ‘un-
likely partners’ (e.g. NGOs; Bocken and Allwood, 2012; Lowitt,
2013). Collaboration across industry boundaries and non-industry
actors is key to a number of the archetypes (e.g. create value
from waste). Finally, some concepts such as Product Service Sys-
tems appear broadly understood by industry, but other models are
still emerging, such as closing material loops. The archetypes may
assist in this educational role to expand the number of familiar
sustainable business model examples.


There are limitations to this proposed categorisation. Firstly, the
approach of using business model archetypes is reflective, based on
historical examples of innovations. Therefore, although it presents
significant potential to assist innovation, it cannot predict entirely
radical new approaches, and as such may need to be revisited from
time to time to reflect the latest state-of-practice. Secondly, the
archetypes currently have a stronger emphasis on environmental
innovations reflecting the state of practice to date. Further explo-
ration of the role of social business model innovations in sustain-
ability is recommended. For example, Jackson’s (2009) view on
systems level change includes creating fulfilling and rewarding
work experiences for all that enhances human creativity and skills,
which may be further explored in new social business model ar-
chetypes. Thirdly, as the area of sustainable business models is
emerging in academia, an inherent issue with the data collection
was the dispersion of journal articles, which necessitated an iter-
ative approach of adding additional search criteria. Although an
attempt was made to make the categorisation of the archetypes
mutually exclusive, the archetypes were exposed to the subjective
nature of the coding process.


The paper defines a research agenda for sustainable business
models by bringing together what are currently fairly disparate
silos of literature in the various areas of sustainability research.
Within each of these archetypes there may be a degree of trans-
formation and associated organisational activities. Demonstrating
various options and possibilities for sustainable business models
will open up new areas of research and inspiration for practice
(companies, NGOs, government) on how to translate social and
environmental value creation into economic profit and competitive


Fig. 11. Sustainable business model archetype ‘develop scale-up solutions’.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5654










advantage for the firm to build the ‘business case for sustainability’
(Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002; Salzmann et al., 2005; Schaltegger
et al., 2012). Through this research, four themes of the level of
technology and innovation, the importance of taking a system-
wide perspective, introducing innovative approaches to collabora-
tion, and the role of education and awareness were identified.
These are viewed as future research opportunities to better un-
derstand how innovative business models for sustainability might
develop. Future research may also look into the wider political,
social and economic change required to make the archetypes
‘mainstream’, and how the archetypes might evolve and be
configured accordingly over time.


5. Conclusions


The literature and practice of innovations for sustainability is
vast but fragmented, with various conceptual papers and many
potential innovative approaches that may contribute to business
model innovation for sustainability. This research proposes a cat-
egorisation of “sustainable business model archetypes” to unify
these disparate contributions that deliver sustainability from the
literature and practice under a common theme.


The archetypes aim to: Categorise and explain business model
innovations for sustainability; Provide mechanisms to assist the
innovation process for embedding sustainability in business
models (e.g. through case studies and workshops); Define a clearer
research agenda for business models for sustainability; and Provide
exemplars for businesses to de-risk the SBM innovation process.


The eight archetypes developed are:


1. Maximise material and energy efficiency
2. Create value from ‘waste’
3. Substitute with renewables and natural processes
4. Deliver functionality, rather than ownership
5. Adopt a stewardship role
6. Encourage sufficiency
7. Re-purpose the business for society/environment
8. Develop scale-up solutions


The sustainable business model archetypes are viewed as a
starting point to broaden and unify the research agenda for sus-
tainable business models.


Acknowledgements


This paper builds on work undertaken on SustainValue, a Eu-
ropean Commission’s 7th Framework Programme (FP7/2007e
2013). The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Eu-
ropean Commission and the contribution of partners on this proj-
ect. The first author was funded through the EPSRC Centre for
Innovative Manufacturing in Industrial Sustainability.


References


Allee, V., 2000. Reconfiguring the value network. J. Bus. Strateg. 21 (4).
Amit, R., Zott, C., 2012. Creating value through business model innovation. MIT


Sloan Manag. Rev. 53 (3), 41e49.
Anderson, R., White, R., 2011. Business Lessons from a Radical Industrialist. St.


Martin’s Griffin Press, New York.
Ashford, N., Hall, R., Ashford, R., 2012. The crisis in employment and consumer


demand: reconciliation with environmental sustainability. Environ. Innov. Soc.
Transit., 1e22.


Ayres, R., Simonis, U. (Eds.), 1994. Industrial Metabolism: Restructuring for Sus-
tainable Development. United Nations University Press, Tokyo & New York.


Baines, T., Lightfoot, H., Evans, S., Neely, A., et al., 2007. State-of-the-art in product-
service systems. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. J. Eng. Manuf. 221 (10), 1543e1552.


Barber, K., Beach, R., Zolkiewski, J., 2012. Environmental sustainability: a value cycle
research agenda. Prod. Plann. Control 23 (2e3), 105e119.


Baumann, H., Boons, F., Bragd, A., 2002. Mapping the green product development
field: engineering, policy and business perspectives. J. Clean. Prod. 10, 409e425.


Beattie, V., Smith, S., 2013. Value creation and business models: refocusing the in-
tellectual capital debate. Br. Acc. Rev.. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bar.2013.06.001.


Beltramello, A., Haie-Fayle, L., Pilat, D., 2013. Why New Business Models Matter for
Green Growth. OECD Publishing, Paris.


Benyus, J., 2002. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature. Perennial, New York.
Birkin, F., Cashman, A., Koh, S., Liu, Z., 2009. New sustainable business models in


China. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 18 (1), 64e99.
Bisgaard, T., Henriksen, K., Bjerre, M., 2012. Green Business Model Innovation e


Conceptualisation, Next Practice and Policy. Nordic Innovation, Oslo.
Bocken, N., Allwood, J., 2012. Strategies to reduce the carbon footprint of consumer


goods by influencing stakeholders. J. Clean. Prod. 35, 118e129.
Bocken, N., Allwood, J., Willey, A., King, J., 2011. Development of an eco-ideation tool


to identify stepwise greenhouse gas emissions reduction options for consumer
goods. J. Clean. Prod. 19 (12), 1279e1287.


Bocken, N., Short, S., Rana, P., Evans, S., 2013. A value mapping tool for sustainable
business modelling. Corp. Gov. 13 (5), 482e497.


Boons, F., Lambert, A., 2002. Eco-industrial parks: stimulating sustainable devel-
opment in mixed industrial parks. Technovation 22, 471e484.


Boons, F., Lüdeke-Freund, F., 2013. Business models for sustainable innovation:
state-of- the-art and steps towards a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 45, 9e19.


Boons, F., Montalvo, C., Quist, J., Wagner, M., 2013. Sustainable innovation, business
models and economic performance: an overview. J. Clean. Prod. 45, 1e8.


Brabham, D., 2008. Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving: an introduction
and cases. Convergence 14 (1), 75e90.


Brugmann, J., Prahalad, C., 2007. Co-creating Business’s new social compact.
February Harv. Bus. Rev., 80e90.


Carroll, A., Shabana, K., 2010. The business case for corporate social responsibility: a
review of concepts, research and practice. Int. J. Manag. Rev. 12 (1), 85e105.


Catulli, M., 2012. What uncertainty? Further insight into why consumers might
be distrustful of product service systems. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 23, (6),
780e793.


Chertow, M.R., 2000. Industrial symbiosis: literature and taxonomy. Ann. Rev. En-
ergy Environ. 25 (1), 313e337.


Chesbrough, H., 2010. Business model innovation: opportunities and barriers. Long
Range Plann. 43 (2e3), 354e363.


Chesbrough, H., Crowther, A.K., 2006. Beyond high tech: early adopters of open
innovation in other industries. R&D Manag. 36 (3), 229e236.


Chouinard, Y., Stanley, V., 2012. The Responsible Company. Patagonia Inc.
Corbin, J., Strauss, A., 1990. Grounded theory research: procedures, canons, and


evaluative criteria. Qual. Sociol. 13 (1).
Costanza, R., D’Arge, R., De Groot, R., Farber, S., et al., 1997. The value of the world’s


ecosystem services and natural capital, 15 May Nature 6630, 253e260.
Dant, R.P., Grünhagen, M., Windsperger, J., 2011. Franchising research frontiers for


the twenty-first century. J. Retail. 87, 253e268.
DECC, 2012. The Energy Efficiency Strategy. The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in


the UK. November 2012. Department for Energy & Climate Change (DECC).
Retrieved from the WWW, December 2012: http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/
decc/11/tackling-climate-change/saving-energy-co2/6927-energy-efficiency-
strategy-the-energy-efficiency.pdf.


Dyllick, T., Hockerts, K., 2002. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability.
Bus. Strat. Environ. 11 (2), 130e141.


Ehrenfeld, J., 2008. Sustainability by Design: A Subversive Strategy for Transforming
Our Consumer Culture. John R. Ehrenfeld. Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.


Elkington, J., 1997. Cannibals with Forks. The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century
Business. Capston, Publishing Ltd, Oxford.


Esposito, M., Kapoor, A., Goyal, S., 2012. Enabling healthcare services for the rural
and semi-urban segments in India: when shared value meets the bottom of the
pyramid. Corp. Gov. (Bingley) 12 (4), 514e533.


Esty, D., Winston, A., 2009. Green to Gold: How Smart Companies Use Environmental
Strategy to Innovate, Create Value, and Build a Competitive Advantage. Daniel C.
Esty and Andrew S. Winston. Rev.. and u.. John Wiley [distributor], Hoboken, N.J.


Evans, S., Bergendahl, M., Gregory, M., Ryan, C., 2009. Towards a Sustainable In-
dustrial System. With Recommendations for Education, Research, Industry and
Policy. Retrieved from the WWW, December 2012: http://www.ifm.eng.cam.ac.
uk/uploads/Resources/Reports/industrial_sustainability_report.pdf.


Fairtrade, 2011. The Fairtrade Foundation. Available at: http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/
(accessed 02.01.11.).


FORA, 2010. Green Business Models in the Nordic Region: a Key to Promote Sus-
tainable Growth. Denmark. Retrieved: http://www.foranet.dk/media/27577/
greenpaper_fora_211010.pdf.


Fresner, J., 1998. Cleaner production as a means for effective environmental man-
agement. J. Clean. Prod. 6 (3e4), 171e179.


FSC, 2012. Forest Stewardship Council. Available at: http://www.fsc.org/ (accessed
30.03.012.).


Garetti, M., Taisch, M., 2012. Sustainable manufacturing: trends and research
challenges. Prod. Plann. Control 23 (2e3), 83e104.


Giarratana, M.S., 2004. The birth of a new industry: entry by start-ups and the
drivers of firm growth e the case of encryption software. Res. Policy 33,
787e806.


Gibbs, D., Deutz, P., 2007. Reflections on implementing industrial ecology through
eco-industrial park development. J. Clean. Prod. 15, 1683e1695.


Goedkoop, M., van Halen, J., te Riele, H., Rommens, P., 1999. Product Service Sys-
tems: Ecological and Economic Basics. The Hague, (NL). Retrieved from the


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e56 55



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref8

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bar.2013.06.001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref30

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/tackling-climate-change/saving-energy-co2/6927-energy-efficiency-strategy-the-energy-efficiency.pdf

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/tackling-climate-change/saving-energy-co2/6927-energy-efficiency-strategy-the-energy-efficiency.pdf

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/tackling-climate-change/saving-energy-co2/6927-energy-efficiency-strategy-the-energy-efficiency.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref36

http://www.ifm.eng.cam.ac.uk/uploads/Resources/Reports/industrial_sustainability_report.pdf

http://www.ifm.eng.cam.ac.uk/uploads/Resources/Reports/industrial_sustainability_report.pdf

http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/

http://www.foranet.dk/media/27577/greenpaper_fora_211010.pdf

http://www.foranet.dk/media/27577/greenpaper_fora_211010.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref40

http://www.fsc.org/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref43




WWW, July 2013: http://teclim.ufba.br/jsf/indicadores/holan%20Product%
20Service%20Systems%20main%20report.pdf.


Grassl, W., 2012. Business models of social enterprise: a design approach. ACRN J.
Entrep. Perspect. 1 (1), 37e60.


Gupta, N.J., Benson, C.C., 2011. Sustainability and competitive advantage. Empir.
Study Value Creat. 9 (1), 121e137.


Hart, S.L., Milstein, M.B., 2003. Creating sustainable value. Acad. Manag. Exec. 17 (2),
56e69.


Hawken, P., Lovins, A.B., Lovins, L.H., 2005. Natural Capitalism: The Next Industrial
Revolution Second. Earthscan Ltd, New York.


Herring, H., Sorrell, S., 2009. Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Consumption: the
Rebound Effect. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.


Høgevold, N.M., 2011. A corporate effort towards a sustainable business model:
a case study from the Norwegian furniture industry. Eur. Bus. Rev. 23 (4),
392e400.


Jackson, T., 2009. Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet.
Earthscan, London.


Jacob, E., 2004. Classification and categorization: a difference that makes a differ-
ence. Libr.Trends 52 (3), 515e540.


Johnson, M., Suskewicz, J., 2009. How to jump-start the clean tech economy. Har-
vard Bus. Rev. (November), 52e60.


Karamchandani, A., Kubzansky, M., Lalwani, N., 2011. Is the bottom of the pyramid
really for you? Harvard Bus. Rev. (March).


Kingfisher, 2012. Kingfisher plc e Responsibility e Overview. Retrieved from the
WWW, March 2012: http://www.kingfisher.co.uk/responsibility/index.asp?
pageid¼2.


Loughran, D., Kulick, J., 2004. Demand-side management and energy efficiency in
the United States. Energy J. 25 (1), 19e43.


Lowitt, E., 2013. The Collaborative Economy. Jossey-Bass (Wiley), San Francisco,
USA.


Lüdeke-Freund, F., 2009. Business Model Concepts in Corporate Sustainability
Contexts. From rhetoric to a generic template for ‘business models for sus-
tainability’. Centre for Sustainability Management, Lüneburg.


Lüdeke-Freund, F., 2010. Towards a conceptual framework of business models for
sustainability. In: ERSCP-EMU Conference, Delft, The Netherlands, pp. 1e28.


Magretta, J., 2002. Why business models matter. Harvard Bus. Rev. 80, (5), 86e92.
McDonough, W., Braungart, M., 2002. Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We


Make Things. North Point Press, New York.
Melton, T., 2005. The benefits of lean manufacturing e what lean thinking has to


offer the process industries. Chem. Eng. Res. Design 83 (A6), 662e673.
Mercier-Laurent, E., 2011. Innovation Ecosystems. ISTE Ltd, London.
Mont, O., Tukker, A., 2006. Product-Service Systems: reviewing achievements and


refining the research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 14 (17), 1451e1454.
MSC, 2012. Marine Stewardship Council. Available at: http://www.msc.org/


(accessed 30.03.12.).
Nerkar, A., Shane, S., 2003. When do start-ups that exploit patented academic


knowledge survive? Int. J. Ind. Organ. 21, 1391e1410.
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., 2005. Clarifying business models: origins, Present, and


future of the concept. Commun. AIS 15 (May).
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., 2010. Business Model Generation: A Handbook for


Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken,
New Jersey.


Pauli, G., 2010. The Blue Economy. 10 Years, 100 Innovations, 100 Million Jobs.
Report to the Club of Rome. Paradigm Publications, Taos, New Mexico, USA.


Porter, M., Kramer, M., 2011. Creating shared value. Harvard Bus. Rev. (February).
Prescott, D., Singh, A., Davy, A., 2002. Food for Thought: Corporate Social Re-


sponsibility for Food and Beverage Manufacturers. International Business
Leaders Forum, pp. 1e16.


Randers, J., 2012. 2052: A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years. Chelsea Green
Publishing, Vermont, p. 376.


Rasmussen, B., 2007. Business Models and the Theory of the Firm. Working Paper.
Victoria University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia.


Richardson, J., 2008. The business model: an integrative framework for strategy
execution. Strateg. Change 17 (5e6), 133e144.


Robèrt, K., 2008. The Natural Step Story, Seeding a Quiet Revolution. New Catalyst
Books, Gabriola Island, BC, Canada.


Romero, D., Molina, A., 2011. Collaborative networked organisations and customer
communities: value co-creation and co-innovation in the networking era.
Production Planning & Control (July), 1e26.


Rubik, F., Scholl, G., 2009. Innovative Approaches in European Sustainable Con-
sumption Policies (Berlin).


Salzmann, O., Ionescu-Somers, A., Steger, U., 2005. The business case for corporate
sustainability: literature review and research options. Eur. Manag. J. 23, (1), 27e36.


Schaltegger, S., Lüdeke-Freund, F., Hansen, E., 2012. Business cases for sustainabil-
ity: the role of business model innovation for corporate sustainability. Int. J.
Innovat. Sustain. Dev. 6 (2).


Schrader, U., Thøgersen, J., 2011. Putting sustainable consumption into practice.
J. Consum. Policy 34 (1), 3e8.


Senge, P., Smith, R., Kruschwitz, N., Laur, J., Schley, S., 2008. The Necessary Revo-
lution. How Individuals and Organizations Are Working Together to Create a
Sustainable World. Nicholas Brealey Publishing, London, Boston.


Shah, R., Ward, P., 2003. Lean manufacturing: context, practice bundles, and per-
formance. J. Operat. Manag. 21, 129e149.


Shrimali, G., Gireesh, S., Slaski, X., Thurber, M., 2011. Improved stoves in India: a
study of sustainable business models. Energy Policy 39 (12), 7543e7556.


Sommer, A., 2012. Managing Green Business Model Transformations. Springer
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.


Stubbs, W., Cocklin, C., 2008. Conceptualizing a “Sustainability business model.”
Organ. Environ. 21 (2), 103e127.


Teece, D., 2010. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range
Planning 43 (2e3), 172e194.


Tukker, A., 2004. Eight types of producteservice system: eight ways to sustain-
ability? Experiences from SusProNet. Bus. Strat. Environ. 13 (4), 246e260.


Tukker, A., 2008. Perspectives on Radical Changes to Sustainable Consumption and
Production. Greenleaf, Sheffield.


UNEP, 2008. Unchaining Value Innovative Approaches to Sustainable Supply.
Retrieved from the WWW, December 2012: http://www.unep.fr/scp/
unchaining/publications/Unchaining-Value-Final-Report.pdf.


UNEP, 2012. Towards a Green Economy - Pathways to Sustainable Development and
Poverty Eradication. Retrieved from the WWW, December 2012: http://www.
grida.no/publications/green-economy/ebook.aspx.


Weizsäcker, E., von Lovins, A., Lovins, L., 1997. Factor Four: Doubling Wealth e
Halving Resource Use: The New Report to the Club of Rome. Earthscan Publi-
cations Ltd, London.


Wells, P., 2004. Creating sustainable business models: the case of the automotive
industry. IIMB Manag. Rev. (Indian Instit. Manag. Bangalore) 16 (4), 15e24.


Wells, P., Bristow, G., 2007. Embedding eco-industrialism into local economies: the
search for sustainable business and policy paradigms. Prog. Ind. Ecol. Int. J. 4
(3e4), 205e218.


Wells, P., Seitz, M., 2005. Business models and closed-loop supply chains: a typol-
ogy. Supply Chain Manag. e Int. J. 10 (3e4), 249e251.


Winkler, H., 2011. Closed-loop production systems - a sustainable supply chain
approach. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 4, 243e246.


Womack, J., Jones, D., 2003. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your
Corporation. Free Press Business, London.


WWF, 2012. Living Planet Report 2012. Retrieved from the WWW, December 2012:
http://awsassets.panda.org/downloads/1_lpr_2012_online_full_size_single_
pages_final_120516.pdf.


Yunus, M., Moingeon, B., Lehmann-Ortega, L., 2010. Building social business models:
lessons from the Grameen experience. Long Range Plan. 43 (2e3), 308e325.


Zott, C., Amit, R., 2010. Business model design: an activity system perspective. Long
Range Plan. 43 (2/3), 216e226.


Zott, C., Amit, R., Massa, L., 2011. The business model: recent developments and
future research. J. Manag. 37 (4), 1019e1042.


N.M.P. Bocken et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 65 (2014) 42e5656


View publication statsView publication stats



http://teclim.ufba.br/jsf/indicadores/holan%20Product%20Service%20Systems%20main%20report.pdf

http://teclim.ufba.br/jsf/indicadores/holan%20Product%20Service%20Systems%20main%20report.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref54

http://www.kingfisher.co.uk/responsibility/index.asp?pageid=2

http://www.kingfisher.co.uk/responsibility/index.asp?pageid=2

http://www.kingfisher.co.uk/responsibility/index.asp?pageid=2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref64

http://www.msc.org/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref86

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref86

http://www.unep.fr/scp/unchaining/publications/Unchaining-Value-Final-Report.pdf

http://www.unep.fr/scp/unchaining/publications/Unchaining-Value-Final-Report.pdf

http://www.grida.no/publications/green-economy/ebook.aspx

http://www.grida.no/publications/green-economy/ebook.aspx

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref95

http://awsassets.panda.org/downloads/1_lpr_2012_online_full_size_single_pages_final_120516.pdf

http://awsassets.panda.org/downloads/1_lpr_2012_online_full_size_single_pages_final_120516.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(13)00803-2/sref99

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260030295


