









Digital Supply Chain: Literature review and a proposed framework
for future research


Gülçin Büyüközkan*, Fethullah Göçer
Industrial Engineering Department, Galatasaray University, 34349 Ortakoy, Istanbul, Turkey


A R T I C L E I N F O


Article history:
Received 18 July 2017
Received in revised form 27 December 2017
Accepted 22 February 2018
Available online 2 March 2018


Keywords:
Digital Supply Chain (DSC)
Literature review
Technology enablers
DSC framework


A B S T R A C T


Suppliers, partners, companies and dealers in supply chains do use, generate and share information with
others. These associations lead to a multitude of challenges and opportunities within the supply chains. A
Digital Supply Chain (DSC) is a smart, value-driven, efficient process to generate new forms of revenue
and business value for organizations and to leverage new approaches with novel technological and
analytical methods DSC is not about whether goods and services are digital or physical, it is about the way
how supply chain processes are managed with a wide variety of innovative technologies, e.g. unmanned
aerial vehicles, cloud computing, and internet of things, among others. Recent literature highlights the
importance of DSC and many industrial researchers discuss its applications. This article reviews the state-
of-the-art of existing DSC literature in detail from both academic and industrial points of view. It
identifies key limitations and prospects in DSC, summarizes prior research and identifies knowledge gaps
by providing advantages, weaknesses and limitations of individual methods The article also aims at
providing a development framework as a roadmap for future research and practice.


© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


1. Introduction


Digital technologies have profoundly altered the way people
communicate and interact with their surroundings. Technological
novelties and personal gadgets, such as mobile devices, personal
computers, self-driving cars, drones, advanced television units,
wearable devices, smartphones and smartwatches change the way
how societies access and exchange information. These emerging
new technologies affect every industry. Supply chains and logistics
services are no exception. Nevertheless, many operations for
producing and delivering goods or services to customers are being
carried out independently in current organizational structures.
Conventional supply chains consist of physical facilities scattered
geographically to help establish and maintain transportation links
among them. Supply chains can be defined as a series of
interconnected activities that involve the coordination, planning
and controlling of products and services between suppliers and
customers. Many of these organizational structures are no longer
self-sufficient due to technological developments. Digitalization
has touched almost each and every aspect of human life all over the


world, greatly affecting supply chain processes. According to
market forecasts [1], 76% of global population have now access to
internet with half of them actively using social media. Moreover,
nine out of ten internet users make online purchases, 43% of
companies make use of sophisticated big data analytics. Cloud
storage is projected to hold about 37% of all generated data by
2020. In the same time horizon, 26 billion internet-connected
“things” are expected to become operational. Digitalization has a
disruptive transformation effect across industries, generating
value and network effects. One day, people may even be able to
dispatch fleets of vehicles with a simple handheld device. It may be
possible to find out the contents of a cargo container with just a
brief electronic glance. Before long, wearable computers on sleeves
could be available. With possibilities abound, organizations
become more aware of these potential developments and
emphasize how DSC can add value to firms. Considering that
the primary focus of organizations is to keep and strengthen their
core competences in a competitive market, modern organizations
should interact with their dealers through DSC processes for the
production and delivery operations of their goods and services.


The DSC is in its infant steps, and the most of its potential for
value creation remains unclaimed. Nonetheless, it has set supply
chains and the logistics industry into a rapid change and a novel
innovation path. In today’s emerging digital model, data centers
replace physical warehouses, bits replace the physical boxes,


* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: gbuyukozkan@gsu.edu.tr (G. Büyüközkan), fgocer@gsu.edu.tr


(F. Göçer).


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.02.010
0166-3615/© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers in Industry


journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/ locate /compind











http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.compind.2018.02.010&domain=pdf

mailto:gbuyukozkan@gsu.edu.tr

mailto:fgocer@gsu.edu.tr

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.02.010

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.02.010

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615

www.elsevier.com/locate/compind




bandwidth replaces the physical trucks. There are shifts in channel
management from conventional distribution centers to retailer
services to broadband providers, to online, and directly to the
customers. Within the DSC, there are many innovations, e.g.
Augmented Reality (AR), Big Data (BD), Cloud Computing (CC),
Robotics (R), Sensor Technology (ST), Omni Channel (OC), Internet
of Things (IoT), Self-Driving Vehicles (SDV), Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV), Nanotechnology (N) and 3D Printing (3DP), to name
a few. Recent literature highlights the importance of DSC and many
industrial researchers discuss its applications. Determining all
potential benefits of different DSC implementations is a tedious
task, as most of the benefit is not derived from the DSC itself but
from the numerous solutions that arise from DSC implementa-
tions. Integration of DSC can provide various benefits to supply
chains and logistics, which are addressed throughout this paper.
The paper reviews the state-of-the-art within the context of DSC
and introduces a framework proposition. It summarizes the past
studies on the subject by critically consolidating and examining
contributions of prior research. It starts with a discussion of the
DSC literature to capture the conceptual and theoretical state of
research to identify knowledge gaps in the literature, including the
similarities and differences between the components of digitali-
zation and their relation to the DSC. Our original contribution to
DSC literature stems from our analysis of advantages, weaknesses
and limitations of the published methodologies. The review also
reflects the implications and inferences of DSC, challenges and
success factors with a managerial perspective. The study presents a
framework by synthesizing past knowledge, identifying important
biases for the further development of DSC to help academics and
practitioners in organizing, conceptualizing and conducting their
research on DSC in the future.


The identification, realization and assessment of DSC requires a
framework to build upon. Many benefits of digitalization in supply
chains are still untapped, because crucial organizational trans-
formations and their management are often neglected or
postponed. Academic and industrial researchers have suggested
several types of approaches to evaluate potential DSC possibilities,
but little research has been conducted so far on how to construct a
complete conceptual or theoretical DSC framework. In this paper,
we intend to fill this research gap.


This literature review attempts to answer the question of ‘How
to integrate the existing importance of digitalization into supply
chain or logistics?’ The answer to this question involves the
development of a framework that can be used in the identification,
realization and assessment of benefits DSC can bring about. These
discussions also include the similarities and distinctions of
components and their relation to the problem statement,
implications and inferences of DSC technologies, challenges and
success factors. The section on managerial implications will
separately discuss these overlapping issues and differences.


The study discusses the benefits of DSC transformation to guide
researchers and industry experts in organizing, conceptualizing,
and conducting their research on DSC of the future. Instead of
presenting empirical results, the outcome of this extensive review
aims to present a foundation for further research in this field. In
this context, this study offers a development framework to capture,
present and relate the digitalization in the supply chains. The main
task of implementing and verifying DSC is to identify its critical
stages, which is not only essential for supply chains to manage and
function better (such as to fully transformed DSC), but is also
functional or essential for a typical supply chain to catch the
transformation path for DSC.


This article is organized as follows: the following section
reviews and categorizes related publications (e.g. journal articles,
theses, industrial reports, etc.) and explains the methodology
adopted in this literature review. The third section discusses the


concept of DSC, its definition, features and components to build a
conceptual framework that is derived from existing literature. The
fourth section describes the advantages and challenges of
digitalization for supply chains and logistics. A DSC framework
for development is constructed in the fifth section. The sixth
section presents the managerial implications to discuss the
limitations as well as possible directions for DSC. The final section
contains the article’s concluding remarks.


2. Review of literature on DSC


This review of journal articles and industrial reports is based on
a classification methodology, which presents how the literature is
approached as a basis for the conceptual and theoretical
framework. First, the classification used in this literature review
is explained and then the methodology of the literature review is
introduced.


2.1. Method of study


Relevant publications are located with the help of a detailed
online search with the objective to collect, organize, and
synthesize existing DSC knowledge. Identified papers span several
types of interrelated disciplines including marketing, manage-
ment, operations management, management science, industrial
engineering, and supply chain management. Due to the lack of
precise key words defining the topic, we put substantial effort to
sort academic and industrial journals by reviewing their titles,
abstracts and manuscripts in the traditional and electronic library
systems. Usually, this step can be carried out by targeting
prominent journals and conferences. This is not the case for DSC
since this recent phenomenon has emerged only a few years ago
and related publication channels are still scattered. Using search
queries in online databases is today the dominant method of
identifying the most relevant papers. It is more practical and
appropriate to focus on online databases rather than reviewing
library collections for a literature review on DSC. Therefore, the
following major online databases were targeted for the past six
years: Elsevier's Scopus, Thomson Reuter's Web of Science, IEEE
Xplore, ProQuest (ABI/INFORM), and ScienceDirect (Elsevier). This
search indicated that the concept of DSC is still in its early years of
research and development among academics, while it is widely
recognized and discussed among practitioners. To include
industrial reports, Google search engine is also used for a wider
reach-out.


In this study, we review and classify relevant studies to gain
insight on DSC. The overall review methodology for DSC papers is
graphically presented in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 illustrates the significant
findings by presenting a detailed summary in terms of types of DSC
publication and its enablers. The literature sources are investigated
in scientific databases and regular search engines which include
books, peer and non-peer reviewed papers, industrial reports and
white papers. The keywords were not predetermined before the
search but they have gradually emerged during the extensive
reading process that took place while drafting this study. The
nomenclature lists the non-exhaustive keywords which is
completed with the mentioned keywords and terms. Accordingly,
this research captures the trends in the DSC literature by
examining published academic articles and industrial reports,
including DSC technologies, in order ensure that these papers are
sufficiently investigated based on the year of publication, subject,
objective or method. Considering the nature of DCS, however, it is
quite a challenge to confine studies into specific categories.
Considering this fragmented structure, the search in major
databases is supported with Google Scholar search engine queries


158 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177


























to end up with a comprehensive bibliography of papers on DSC. The
following section presents this comprehensive review.


Nomenclature
AR Augmented Reality
BD Big Data
CC Cloud Computing
DSC Digital Supply Chain
IoT Internet of Things
N Nanotechnology
OC Omni Channel
R Robotics
ST Sensor Technology
SCOR Supply Chain Operations Reference
SDV Self-Driving Vehicles
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
3DP 3D Printing


2.2. Academic literature on DSC


Today’s customers are very aware, attached and knowledgeable
about how to best use the latest digital technologies. The direction
of technological focus is shifting from serving companies towards
serving individuals. Such disruptions can lead to loss of market
position to competitors if organizations do not act in a timely
manner and improve their processes. This forces businesses to


reconsider how they can transform their classical supply chain
operations to better address the demands of the rising number of
their now well-equipped customers.


Digitalization has started to receive much attention from
organizations all over the world as it creates superior benefits to a
wide range of companies. Our review on DSC literature signifies a
gap between the theory and practice in supply chains. Currently
there is a limited number of studies regarding DSC. As far as we
know, there are no academic studies that explicitly focus on the
DSC concept. There however, exists supply chain focused articles
which discuss DSC technologies in terms of their applications. The
following analysis supports this statement. According to the
factors on which DSC literature has been reviewed, the spider
diagram in Fig. 3 highlights that the focus of the study on DSC has
primarily been on its enablers. Existing journal articles and
conference papers related to DSC and its technologies that focus on
supply chains are classified in Table 1. Table 2 then lists the master
or doctoral theses related to DSC.


2.3. Published books on DSC


To the best of our knowledge, the DSC chapter in Managing
Digital Enterprise book prepared by Xu [57] is one of the earliest
books which substantiates the concept of DSC. The book is mainly
about rapid development of digitalization, dramatic advancements


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35


Peer-Reviewed Articles


Non-Peer Reviewed Articles


Books


Reports


Conference Proceedings


Websites


Theses


Magazine Articles


Fig. 2. Types of publication for DSC and its enablers.


Fig. 1. Review Methodology.


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 159






in digital technologies and its strategic importance in organiza-
tions. There is also a dedicated chapter about DSC that
comprehensively presents DSC in terms of digital enterprises,
issues and success factors of DSC, emerging trends and future
directions. Skilton [58] focuses on practical applications of new
digital solutions and illustrates how companies can have a role in
digital access and digital delivery while illustrating the DSC
capability strategies. Sanders [59] attempts to provide a systematic
framework for companies to display the implementation of BD
analytics across the supply chain on how to turn data into
intelligence and thus succeed to competitive advantages.


Another book that elaborates on the field of DSC is Digital
Enterprise Transformation prepared by Uhl and Gollenia [60]. The
authors published its new edition in 2016 [61]. These original and
new editions are dedicated to the combination of transformation
ability and novel digital skills to be developed. Again, one of its
chapters is dedicated to DSC management, explaining the key
features of supply chain management and the SCOR model. It also
introduces 18 cases of supply chain management to assess digital
cases on the SCOR model to position strategic effort-benefits
portfolio.


A recently published book on DSC entitled “E-Logistics:
Managing Your Digital Supply Chains for Competitive Advantage”
authored by Wang [62] aims to capture the state-of-the-art
developments in managing supply chains to gain competitive
advantage. The book also investigates the emerging technological
changes in e-logistics and considers what the future holds for this
rapidly shifting and evolving field.


The latest book on DSC is authored by Editors Oswal and
Kleinemeier [63]. This book presents an overview of digitalization,
its impacts, drivers and objectives. It includes chapters on DSC
management for the automotive supplier industry, digital business
transformation and the effect of digital culture with its effect on
supply chain organizations, etc. This book details the concept of
DSC and its related technologies to enhance and improve supply
chain management processes.


2.4. Industrial reports on DSC


The analysis of industrial reports is provided in this subsection.
There is a gradual increase in the number of sectoral reports about
DSC as new technological improvements emerge. IBM [64]
predicted in its report that future supply chains would be smarter.
They have identified the challenges and risks that supply chains
will face and priorities that needed to be handled. As far as we
know, one of the earliest reports about DSC is published by


Capgemini Consulting [65], which introduced a digital transfor-
mation approach to supply chains to describe the deficits and
benefits of digitally transformed supply chains. Their framework
consists of DSC execution and strategy stages that in essence
defines DSC as an approach to access extensive information and
achieve greater collaboration. Accenture [66] is another consulting
company that assessed the impact of digital technologies on supply
chain management and offered new opportunities to unlock DSC’s
full potential. To enable DSC, they proposed the following four key
attributes: Rapid, Scalable, Intelligent, and Connected. Another
company, Supply Chain Insights, also published a report on DSC
that sheds light on driving the DSC transformation in the industry
[67,68]. Their report commences with a definition of digital
organization and discusses the creation of a DSC strategy, then
captures the highlights by conducting a questionnaire during the
years 2013 and 2014. Their report aims to help supply chain
managers to align their source, make and deliver strategies.
ATKearney and WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management united
their forces to prepare a collaborative report about DSC [69]. They
dedicated their study to the future role of DSC in a global and
connected world. Their analysis indicated that managers of leading
European companies expect the digital transformation in next
three years to be traditional (information technology integration)
rather than novel technological advances (e.g. 3DP, R, IoT, etc.).
Monsanto farming company is among the pioneers investing in the
DSC to bring new forms of revenue and business value to the
farming market [70]. They have presented several examples to
share how DSC are connected to better product and customer
experience. Their own improvements made them the 35th top
supply chain company in 2015, a significant improvement from
100s, according to Gartner’s ranking for the last 11 years.


Bearingpoint [1] consulting company presented a report on
trends in DSC management and digitalization’s impact on supply
chain as it transforms every industry. Their approach consists of
prepare, assess, analyze and roadmap & governance steps. The
Digital Supply Chain Initiative [71] gathered information from
twenty-four top managers responsible for the world’s largest
supply chains. These executives forecast that the most significant
transformation for organizations will occur over the next 5 years.
This report provides a DSC implementation framework and
roadmap to assist industry leaders, supply chains managers and
any other specialists interested in leading-edge supply chains
developments. These developments aim to transform supply chain
organization by focusing on the customer, maximizing demand,
decreasing supply chain costs and increasing organizations’
revenues. The report’s practical steps guide business managers


0
5


10
15
20
25
30


AR
BD


CC


DSC


Industry 4.0


IoT


M2M
N


OC


R


ST


SDV


UAV


3DP


Fig. 3. Various subjects covered in selected journals.


160 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






Table 1
Literature Review of DSC.


References Subject Objective Method Contribution


Tiwari et al. [2] BD This paper investigates BD in supply chains between 2010
and 2016 and provides insights to industries.


Review This paper contributes by providing a guideline for
academicians and practitioners in implementing BD in
different aspects of supply chains.


Farahani
et al. [3]


DSC This paper provides 17 digital supply chain management
cases for automotive supply chains using expert interviews
to form the basis for the creation of the DSC.


Modeling This paper contributes by providing a recipe for managers
on how to bring innovations on a cohesive agenda.


Hofmann and
Rüsch [4]


Industry
4.0


This paper sheds light on the topic of Industry 4.0 in the
context of logistics management.


Modeling This paper contributes by presenting core components of
the Industry 4.0 to make the concept more understandable.


Merlino and
Sproge [5]


AR This paper explores the main technological changes and the
most advanced cases in supply chain.


Review This paper contributes as a review of the main technological
factors impacting and transforming supply chain.


Majeed and
Rupasinghe
[6]


IoT The paper derives a conceptual framework to enhance
inbound and outbound operations in ERP for fashion
apparel and footwear industries.


Modeling This paper contributes by managing, optimizing and
automating the operations in an ERP system through RFID
technology.


Nguyen
et al. [7]


BD This paper reviews the BD within supply chain context to
responds where and how BD has been applied.


Review This paper contributes by proposing a novel classification
framework that provides a full picture of current literature
on BD.


Ben-Daya
et al. [8]


IoT This paper explores the role of IoT and its impact on supply
chain through an extensive literature review.


Review This paper contributes by covering important aspects of IoT
in supply chain including its definition, main technology
enablers and various supply chain processes and
applications.


Korpela et al [9] DSC This paper investigates the requirements and
functionalities of DSC integration.


Modeling This paper contributes by offering cost effective supply
chain integration.


Michel [10] DSC This paper compiles the knowledge of technology
executives, consultants and supply chain analysts in the
area of DSC and industry 4.0.


Review This paper contributes by stating the six DSC trends using
the studies of SC analysts, consultants and executives.


Scuotto et al.
[11]


DSC This paper presents the relationship among multiple buyers
and suppliers in the context of DSC management.


Modeling This paper contributes by underlining the use of
information and communication technology using the
service sector in Italy


Vanderroost
et al. [12]


AR This paper provides an extensive overview of computer
systems that are used in the logistics of a food package’s life
cycle and that to a certain extent integrate novel
technologies.


Review This paper contributes by improving efficiency of logistics
operations on food packages and encourages resolving the
technical issues.


Büyüközkan
and Göçer
[13]


DSC This paper proposes a novel MCDM approach to evaluate
supplier selection process under DSC environment.


Case Study
Supplier
Selection


The paper contributes by proposing a novel framework
combines the Interval Valued Intuitionistic Fuzzy Analytic
Hierarchy Process to evaluate criteria weights and Additive
Ratio Assessment methodology for alternative assessment
procedure.


Büyüközkan
and Göçer
[14]


DSC This paper approaches the supplier selection problem in a
DSC environment by the help of an extension of Multi-
Objective Optimization by Ratio Analysis.


Case Study
Supplier
Selection


This paper contributes by utilizing the interval valued
intuitionistic fuzzy numbers and a group decision making
approach for a suitable supplier selection in a DSC
environment.


Tenkorang and
Helo [15]


BD This paper discusses the BD issues, trends and perspectives
in supply chain management.


Review This paper contributes by presenting an original literature
review research and proposes a value-adding framework on
BD II.


Gunasekaran
et al. [16]


BD This paper identifies the influence of connectivity and
information sharing resources under the mediation effect of
top management commitment on BD and supply chains.


Modeling This paper conceptualizes the assimilation as acceptance,
routinization, and assimilation stages.


Hazen et al. [17] BD This article presents a research by proposing an agenda
based on a theory by reviewing the eight theories that can
be used by researchers to examine and clarify the nature of
BD analytics impact on supply chain sustainability.


Modeling This paper contributes by enabling scholars and
practitioners to understand how companywide BD and
predictive analytics initiatives might impact measures of
supply chain sustainability.


Kumar et al.
[18]


DSC This article examines the role of smart city in changing the
nature and form of traditional supply chain using an
integrative framework through a case study.


Case Study
Manufacturing
system


This paper contributes by developing an integrative
framework for understanding the interplay between smart
city and distributed manufacturing on supply chain design.


Papadopoulos
et al. [19]


BD This study presents a framework in that the BD is used for
sustainability in disaster relief activities in the aftermath of
2015 Nepal earthquake.


Modeling The article contributes to the literature on resilience in
disaster supply chain by a framework using BD.


Wu et al. [20] DSC This review focuses on exploring the current status and
remaining issues of smart supply chain management.


Review This paper contributes by providing original and relevant
guidance for researchers and practitioners on developing
smart supply chains.


Wu et al. [21] BD This article presents a methodology using the fuzzy and
grey Delphi to identify a set of reliable attributes and
transform BD to a manageable scale to consider their
impacts.


Modeling This paper contributes by showing the greater influence of
capacity and operations than other supply chain attributes.


Zhao et al. [22] BD This paper offers multiple objective optimization
methodology for a green supply chain management scheme
that minimizes the inherent risk occurred by hazardous
materials using BD analysis.


Modeling This study contributes in improvement of green supply
chain management in three scenarios involving risk
minimization and carbon emission in different orders.


Zhong et al. [23] BD This study examines the representative BD applications and
reviews the current technologies, as well as models and
algorithms are reviewed.


Review This paper contributes to the academia and practitioners to
get insights and observation of BD implementation in
service and manufacturing sectors.


Wang et al. [24] BD This study reviews the literature on BD business analytics in
logistics and supply chains management and explores the
applications of BD in supply chain strategy and operation.


Review This article stresses the significance of BD applications on
logistics and supply chain management.


Cortés et al. [25] IoT Review


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 161






Table 1 (Continued)


References Subject Objective Method Contribution


This paper offers revisions and proposal of IoT applications
in supply chain management and reviews the applications
of IoT in supply chain management.


This paper contributes by stating the benefits of
incorporating the IoT not only for gaining the better
management and efficiency improvement.


Chen [26] IoT This case study designs the autonomous agent-based trace
system using IoT architecture based on Fuzzy CM and fuzzy
rule methods in products usage life cycles.


Case Study
Agriculture
Food Product


This paper contributes simulating food tracing complex
system with imprecise relationships for agriculture food
product.


Wamba and
Akter [27]


BD This review provides BD analytics for supply chain
management literature using studies related to the areas
within SCOPUS.


Review This paper contributes to the literature by stating the near
future transformation of supply chain management
practices using the BD analytics.


Gnimpieba
et al. [28]


IoT
and
CC


This study aims using IoT and CC technology for real time
geo-positioning and tracing of goods and collaboration
between involved players in a logistic process.


Modeling This paper contributes by implying the information sharing
aspect for interoperability and collaboration between
involved actors in a logistic flow by introducing the IoT and
CC technologies.


Gospic and
Bakmaz [29]


M2M This paper presents comprehensive survey on Machine to
Machine (M2M) communications towards realization of
smart logistics systems.


Modeling This study emphasizes the specific properties of M2 M
communications which are of importance for applications
of M2 M systems in logistics services.


Hofmann [30] BD This study deals with BD potential on improving the various
supply chain processes and aims elaborating BD
characteristic with the greatest potential that mitigates the
bullwhip effect.


Modeling The paper contributes to the literature by operationalizing
BD in the control engineering analyses.


Isasi et al. [31] BD This article aims to review the state-of the-art BD and
business analytics applications in supply chains by means of
bibliometric and systematic analysis.


Review This paper contributes to the literature by identifying the
key trends, challenges and knowledge gaps for BD.


Mehmood and
Graham [32]


BD This study uses Markov models for the integration of BD
with city transport sharing in health care.


Modeling This paper aims to contribute to the theory on BD and city
operations by exploring how BD leads to progresses in
transport capacity sharing.


Schoenherr and
Pero [33]


BD This article discusses the results of a large-scale survey on
BD among supply chain management professionals and
identifies major benefits and obstacles to predictive
analytics.


Modeling This paper intents to provide a timely assessment of BD,
illustrate the future potential of BD, and motivate additional
research on it.


Sebastian and
Omera [34]


3DP This paper examines the areas of the supply chains which is
most likely to be disrupted by 3DP and identifies the key
issues that must be addressed in a roadmap for future
researches and practices.


Review This paper contributes to the literature by pinpointing the
necessity to mitigate the effects of disruption on future
supply chain by 3DP.


Tan et al. [35] BD This study wishes to address analytic techniques by testing
and developing an infrastructure using the deduction graph
techniques for companies to combine their capability sets
with other companies.


Case Study
Eyeglasses
Manufacturer


This study contributes by filling the gap on the lack of data
analytics techniques to aid companies to gain competitive
advantage and capture the potential of innovation.


Tadejko [36] IoT This paper describes some principles and characteristics of
IoT, and briefly discusses the application of it in modern
logistics. Some aspects of modern logistics related to the IoT
technology is studied.


Review This study contributes by introducing and presenting the
current application areas of IoT and future prospects of this
technology.


Zhong et al. [37] BD This study deals with a holistic BD methodology to excavate
frequent trajectory from extensive RFID enabled shop floor
logistics data with a number of innovations highlighted.


Modeling This paper contributes by establishing a guide for end-users
to carry out associated decisions.


Hazen et al. [38] BD This paper introduces the data quality problems in the
context of supply chains management and proposes a
methodology for monitoring and controlling data.


Theory This paper contributes by a review of literature on BD in
supply chain and hope to encourage interdisciplinary
collaboration for controlling data.


Leveling et al.
[39]


BD This paper focuses on BD solutions dealing with supply
chains by representing a key discipline for managing the
increased collaboration.


Review This paper present BD applications’ classification and its
potential benefits. And also, it outlines the general
technologies of BD.


Rozados and
Tjahjono [40]


BD The investigations range from the fundamentals of BD, its
taxonomy and the level of maturity of BD solutions.


Review This study contributes to the literature by explore the role of
BD in supply chains management


Wang and Liu
[41]


IoT This article introduces IoT related technologies and then
analyzes the functions and utilities of IoT by means of
production supply chain on applications of agriculture
resources.


Modeling This article contributes by building a model on Agricultural
Means of Production Supply Chain using IoT technologies.


Bhargava et al.
[42]


DSC This study examines the challenges and approaches for
secure collaboration among partners in DSCs.


Modeling This study contributes by suggesting a novel approach
relying on the usage of trust brokers and taint analyses.


Cirulis and
Ginters [43]
[41]


AR This paper describes the basic elements of logistics and pays
special attention to improvement possibilities in packaging,
handling, storage and transportation phases.


Modeling This study contributes to the literature by implying that AR
technologies can improve the execution of logistics
elements.


Ginters et al.
[44]


AR This paper presents an AR and RFID application for an
outdoor environment combined logistic item visualization


Modeling This study contributes improvement of logistics processes
by use of AR RFID technologies in outdoor environment.


Waller and
Fawcett [45]


BD This paper describes possible applications of predictive
analytics and BD in practice and provides examples of
research questions, as well as examples that stem from
management theories.


Theory This paper contributes by proposing specific steps for
interested researchers to research on the intersection of
supply chain management and BD.


Sun [46] IoT This paper presents an approach using applications of RFID
technology for logistics on IoT


Modeling This study contributes by introducing RFID technology for
logistics on IoT.


Wagenaar [47] IoT This research analyses the benefits the IoT has on supply
chains through a literature study, and looks how these
benefits can increase revenue within supply chain.


Review This study contributes by increasing revenue in a supply
chain and utilize new business models using IoT.


162 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






to better comprehend game-changing technologies that affect all
supply chain organizations and to gain overview of key differences
between traditional and digital supply chains.


Bain & Company Consulting focused on the intangible benefits
of a DSC [72]. Accordingly, the latest digital transformation shaped
intangible assets, things like intellectual property or customer
relationship of a company, rather than its tangible assets. They
offer solutions as applying various digital technologies across DSC
to deliver powerful ways for organizations. Rakowski [73]
presented the latest technology trends in her article to emphasize
that supply chains go digital. She suggests that the future of
technology will drive a new wave of productivity by digitalization
of key organization and financial processes and collaboration will
increase and thus fuel innovation so that organization will be run
simpler with blurred lines and smarter procurements. Cerasis
[74,75] also prepared reports on the future of supply chains to
know how the technology is transforming different industries. EY
[76] prepared another report on DSC from the perspective of BD to
notify companies to act as soon as possible to focus on BD to
preserve their competitive edge. The Boston Consulting Group
described the advantages of DSC in three key paths [77]. It suggests


possible ways to address performance gaps, innovate business
processes and disrupt supply chain strategies. These ways include
applying digital technologies, such as advanced analytics to
calculate the optimal inventory level and forecast future demand
more accurately, rather than applying cumbersome conventional
approaches.


The present and future state of digital transformation in supply
chains is analyzed in the reports of GT Nexus and Capgemini
Consulting [78,79]. Their key findings from the survey with 337
leading executives from several global supply chain organizations
suggest that 75% of executives deem DSC to be “important or very
important”, 50% say DSC is “very important”, 33% of respondents
are “dissatisfied” with the progress so far, while only 5% are “very
satisfied”. They accept that key technology enablers are identified
but have not been widely used. They also expect dramatic changes
to occur within next five years.


DHL runs series of trend research on logistics about creating
value [80–91]. These reports on AR, BD, UAV, Low Cost ST, SDV, IoT,
OC, 3DP and R in Logistics inspire novel strategies and innovation
in the logistics industry. Strategy& global team also prepared a
series of reports on digitalization of supply chain organizations


Table 2
Theses on DSC.


References Subject Objective Contribution


Aktepe [48] CC This master thesis investigates the awareness of logistics companies
regarding CC, their reasons for preferring or not preferring the usage of
CC and benefits and risks of CC for logistics companies. In this context,
findings derived from the analysis of the data obtained via interviews
with the logistics companies are evaluated in the context of
technological, organizational and environmental issues.


This thesis contributes by enhancing the competition levels in the
markets by integrating high technologies, CC, offers to the logistics
companies.


Aviles [49] CC This doctoral dissertation aims to explore the advantages and outcome
of strong collaborative relationships among organizations. The reliance
on the internal relationship of organizations has amplified and become
a principal strategy with the organizations compete as supply chains of
multi-relationship. There are several contradictory views on cloud
viability but supply chain collaboration may be facilitated by the
logistics technologies in the cloud.


This dissertation contributes by stating that maintaining collaborative
relationships provide value-added capabilities that logistics
organizations require in order to remain competitive and be successful
in some cases strengthen by the use of CC.


Kache [50] BD This doctoral dissertation focuses on one exemplary under-represented
area of research, concerning the role and value of information in supply
chains in general, and the implications of BD on information usage at
corporate and supply chain level in particular. Thus, taking the digital
business transformation perspective, a key focus is addressed on BD
analytics and the value of information in supply chains.


This dissertation provides a thorough overview of the current state of
research in supply chain management, outlining a range of under-
represented research areas as identified through a review of literature
reviews.


Tor!gul [51] IoT This master thesis presents a closed loop supply chain to meet the
demand of the sales and collection centers for both remanufactured
and new products. Manufacturers have refurbishing, disassembly and
disposal options for assessment of returned products.


This thesis contributes to the literature by providing a mixed-integer
linear-programming approach for a single product which is totally
modular.


Aikaterini
[52]


IoT This master thesis proposes investigation of connected services extent
that could be used in the downstream automotive supply chain as a
long term viable solution. Opportunities and challenges is identified by
door-to-door perspectives concerning the different stakeholders
among the supply chain.


This thesis contributes to the literature by illustrating the opportunities
in automotive industry by the advances in IoT and BD.


Gantzia and
Sklatinioti
[53]


CC This master thesis aims to investigate benefits and challenges perceived
by the cloud providers and third-party logistics firm technology users
and which cloud services are used in the third-party logistics industry.
Thesis has focused on the assessment of three third-party logistics
firms and three cloud providers to grasp the picture in complete.


This thesis contributes that Software as a Service and more precisely,
transportation administration software, as the most prevailing cloud-
based system applied in the third party logistic industry.


Pang [54] IoT
ST


This doctoral dissertation investigates the technologies and
architectures of the IoT for these two applications as so-called Food-IoT
and Health-IoT respectively to resolve a series of research problems
about the wireless sensor Network architectures, device architectures
and system integration architectures.


This dissertation contributes to the literature by presenting the
so-called Business-Technology Co-Design, to resolve an essential
challenge in research on the IoT.


Keller [55] IoT
ST


This doctoral dissertation evaluates the distribution center in Unna,
Germany for RFID enabled outgoing goods processing. In this case
scenario, distinguishing the tracked RFID tagged pallets loaded onto
trucks and other pallets also in range of the reader is necessary.


This dissertation contributes by identifying meaningful attributes and
addresses those weaknesses by means of a machine learning based
approach.


Li and Lu
[56]


IoT This doctoral dissertation examines how the organizational changes in
Small and Medium Enterprises is influenced by the IoT and research
how Small and Medium Enterprises manage the changes in this IOT era.
Finally, to help the Small and Medium Enterprises, thesis suggests
strategy developments to make successful organizational changes.


This dissertation contributes by examining how IoT influences the
organizational changes in small and medium sized enterprises and how
they manage the changes in IoT era.


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 163






[92–95]. However, there are not any companies that have yet
succeeded in truly building DSC, and DSC applications remain
limited. The experts predict that in the next five-to-ten-years many
industries will be implementing DSC and tremendous changes to
take place.


2.5. Advantages, weaknesses and limitations of DSC literature


It is important to highlight that the identified 109 articles
influenced the results of this study reported in Section 2 (Figs. 2–
3). In some circumstances, the paper under review will still be
utilized to describe the results and to gain a better understanding
of the topic. In this section, the advantages, weaknesses and
limitations of the published methodologies are presented, which
could correlate the papers in order to find future trends, identify
knowledge gaps, synthesize past knowledge, identify important
biases and to find common features among various studies. We
decided to build Tables 1 and 2 with the names of the authors,
year of publication and the reference number as columns. Listed
in the rows, the subject indicates the literature’s inclusive focus,
objective clarifies the goal of the research paper; method
identifies the methodology used in the paper while the
contribution involves the goal of literature’s contribution
statement with its clear and concise focal points. These
characteristics have been nominated based on authors’ expertise
in the field and the relevant studies. Books and industrial reports
are synthesized to identify important biases by narrating their
findings so that short, specific and precise knowledge gaps could
be extracted from these statements.


When the relevant literature on DSC is consolidated and
examined thoroughly, they exhibit certain advantages to the
readers. These utilized advantages describe the roadmap for
establishing the DSC framework in the following sections based on
the overview of the content, scope, and findings of selected
literature. On the other hand, academics and practitioners have
defined DSC from diverse perspectives (Section 3.1). It is easily
comprehensible that so far, there is no unanimously adopted
definition on the concept of DSC. These diverse definitions of DSC
create a complexity for researchers to compile a general
description that is acceptable by the majority. The key fundamental
principles of existing DSC literature have significant limitations
when establishing DSC framework. Based on the papers in this
research category, following sections utilize and identify the key
limitations and prospects in DSC, summarize prior research to
identify knowledge gaps by providing advantages, weaknesses and
limitations of individual methods and introduce a development
framework as a roadmap for future research and practice.


3. Digital Supply Chain (DSC)


The network between companies and their suppliers built for
production and distribution of a specific product is defined as a
supply chain. It represents the necessary steps taken to deliver a
product or service to customers. According to supply chain council,
these steps can be managed with the help of the SCOR model that
consist of the Plan, Source, Make, Deliver, Return processes.
Management of supply chain is a significant process since
optimized supply chains will lead to lower costs and faster
production cycles. However, traditional supply chain has lack of
certain attributes that are needed in today’s and tomorrow’s
business requirements. The traditional supply chain consists of a
series of largely discrete, siloed steps. Transforming a traditional
supply chain into DSC breaks down these walls so that the chain
turns into an integrated system that runs flawlessly. DSC is not
about whether the products or services are physical or digital, it is
the way how supply chain is managed.


An increasing number of senior executives have started to
support and get involved with organizations’ digital initiatives since
more and more of them have realized the importance of digitaliza-
tion on their corporate performance and hence the competitive
advantage of the corporation. In a recent study [96] involving 850
senior executives representing the full range of industries, regions
and firm sizes, 31% of CEOs of the participant organizations
personally sponsored their digital initiatives in 2013 while the same
figure was 23% in 2012. Supply chain operations face a common
confrontation.Detailed information aboutsupplychain operations is
held locally, which in turns creates functional, organizational, and
cultural storage points. This situation undermines the effective and
efficient collaboration among distinctive sections of the supplychain
processes while increasing the possibility of complications evolving
at later stages, and thus limits the options for response [66]. Many
different companies from diverse sectors are investing profoundly
on digitalizing their business operations and their supply chains.
Take major logistics service providers such as DHL, for example,
which monitors and reports on the trends that could have an impact
on the logistics industry in the future. DB Schenker, another logistics
service provider, is investing in a digital mobility lab. Airlines with
strongcargo operations, such as THY, Lufthansa and Emirates expand
their paperless e-freight offerings with data cleaning for customers.
Monsanto, an agriculture company, is investing on ST to digitalize
farming operations. Global retailers Amazon and Alibaba have
invested in drones and R for handling and delivery of goods. The
following subsection summarizes several definitions of DSC taken
from different sources.


3.1. Definitions of DSC


There are several definitions of DSC in literature. The ones that
are found throughout this research are presented in this article
with a chronological order. The definition that reflects articles’
view on DSC is also presented at the end of this subsection.


Capgemini Consulting [65] states that traditional supply chain
relies on a mixture of electronic processes and paper-based
documentations. The organizational structures are often illustrat-
ed by functional and geographical silos which are reluctant to
share information openly, leading to a sub-optimal performance.
DSC, on the other hand, has the capability of making widespread
information available, superior collaboration and communications
across digital platforms, resulting in enhanced reliability, agility
and effectiveness.


Bhargava et al. [42] state that DSC is composed of those systems
(e.g. software, hardware, communication networks) that support
interactions between globally distributed organizations and orches-
trates the activities of the partners in supply chains. These activities
include buying, making, storing, moving and selling a product.


Accenture Consulting [66] proposes that digitalization has the
potential to transform supply chains by making services more
valuable, accessible and affordable. Accordingly, a different
perspective is needed for digital technologies to create new
supply chain opportunities. Organizations should reimagine their
supply chains as a digital supply network that not only unites
physical flows of products and services, but also talents, informa-
tion and finance. In an abstract sense, people and data, as well as
materials, products and supplies, must travel together across the
extended enterprise.


According to Kinnet [70], DSC is an intelligent, value driven
network that leverages new approaches with technology and
analytics to create new forms of revenue and business value.


The analysis of the report prepared by A.T. Kearney and WHU-
Otto Beisheim School of Management [69] defines DSC as the best-
fit technologies that support and synchronize supply chain
processes – including warehouse and transportation systems,


164 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), advanced picking technolo-
gies, and innovative planning and scheduling systems to quickly
alleviate areas of “pain,” such as waste in the supply chain, in a
world where demand is volatile and risks are high.


The Digital Supply Chain Initiative [71] describes the DSC as a
customer centric platform that captures and maximizes the
utilization of real-time information emerging from variety of
sources. They suggest that DSC enables demand stimulation,
sensing, matching and management in order to have an optimized
performance and minimized risk.


According to Rouse [97], DSC is a supply chain whose
foundation is built on Web-enabled capabilities. Many supply
chains use a mix of paper-based and IT-enabled processes. A true
DSC goes far beyond this hybrid model to fully capitalize on
connectivity, system integration and the information-producing
capabilities of “smart” components.


Cecere [68] defines DSC as a process that uses new technologies
to define processes to sense, respond and orchestrate bi-direc-
tionally from market to market (from the channel to supplier
networks). The processes move at the cadence of the market.


This analysis shows that there are several different definitions
of DSC. However, all of them share unifying common concepts. The
definition of DSC, in our view, is an intelligent best-fit technological
system that is based on the capability of massive data disposal and
excellent cooperation and communication for digital hardware,
software, and networks to support and synchronize interaction
between organizations by making services more valuable,
accessible and affordable with consistent, agile and effective
outcomes. Therefore, the objective of this review is to propose
integrated approaches for building an effective DSC structure.


3.2. Features of DSC


Most of the world’s successful organizations have excellence in
their supply chains, and some even argue that the competition
among organizations is competition among their supply chains.
For instance, the two largest supermarket chains in Australia,
Woolworths and Coles, are competing head-to-head with their
global chains in terms of high agility with greater service and cost
productivity. Another example is iPad’s supply chain: its semi-
conductors are manufactured in three countries, the assembly is
done in a different country, the monitors are brought in from
another set of countries, whilst the design and branding is done in
the U.S. where the Apple Inc. is headquartered [57]. Supply chains
are evolving and turning into something novel. The days when a
classical supply chain only moves goods from one place to another
is now over. Nowadays, supply chains require a significant size of
complex activities all of which need to be coordinated and tracked.
Thus, digitalization enables the evolution of the next generation of
supply chains offering both flexibility and efficiency. Since digital
solutions are disrupting traditional supply chains, there are some
distinct features associated with virtually every DSC. These distinct
advantages are compiled into the following eleven main features
that DSC aim to achieve;


Speed: The speed at which goods are delivered is central for
both suppliers and those involved in DSC. Not only do organiza-
tions desire to get the stock as soon as it is needed, but those
working within DSC want to be able to move more in a shorter
period of time. This ability to react quickly to demand is going to be
one of the most important pillars of a DSC as organizations look for
new ways to get product delivery quickly. For instance, Amazon
(Prime Air) and Google (Project Wing) both test drones for delivery
systems to get packages to customers in 30-min or less to break the
illusive delivery barrier. It may be seen as science fiction for the
moment, but DSC will make it real that this kind of speed will be
accomplished [1,66,98].


Flexibility: Digitalization in supply chains implies the need for
operational agility with ease in adaption to changing circum-
stances. This does not describe how items are delivered, but
defines the way how to react to problems within supply chains. For
example, political instability in Syria, diseases like the West African
Ebola epidemic or natural disasters such as earthquakes can be
devastating. Nevertheless, predicting such events or taking
suitable measures and reacting efficiently and effectively can
minimize disruptions in supply chains. This is the case for
traditional supply chains, but DSC has the ability to accomplish
this almost instantaneously by efficiently using the information
collected and modelled [94,98].


Global connectivity: The internet has made the world a smaller
place. Organizations need to deliver goods and services throughout
the world quickly. This necessitates a truly global supply chain to
enable organizations not only to deliver, but also to ensure reaction
at local level. If a certain product made in Europe is demanded in
the United States, it will be inefficient to have it fetched all the way
from Europe to United States at the exact instant it is needed. It
would take a lot of time and potential loss of revenue. Thus, DSC
establishes a way to build effective global hubs to locally supply
goods and services, instead of carrying them across the world for a
sole order [94,98].


Real-time inventory: DSC provides the means to ensure that
the stock on hand is sufficient, but not excessive, to meet the
demand. DSC makes warehouse management more efficient and
monitors stock levels continuously with the help of arrays of
sensors or via other advanced technologies. While customer
behavior changes rapidly, the supply always needs to meet the
demand. Consumers can place orders anytime from anywhere,
thus stock at hand should be monitored in real time. This does not
mean the same amount of inventory should be kept at every
distribution center. It in fact means that buying trends and future
demand for goods and services shall be recognized in advance to
make informed decisions. DSC provides these means required for
advanced analytics [94,98].


Intelligent: New generation technological enablers provide
smart products that are equipped with enough computing power
so that self-learning and autonomous decision-making could be
enabled based on defined algorithms. DSC encompasses this
feature that allow improved decision making, automated execu-
tion and abets innovations in operations [98,99].


Transparency: In a transparent supply chain, links in the chain
do comprehend and act according to other links’ behaviors and
needs. In case of lack of transparency, the orderly flow within
supply chain will inevitably be disrupted somewhere. DSC can
enable companies to act transparently and be better prepared to
disruptions by anticipating, modeling the network, creating what-
if scenarios and adjusting the chain instantaneously to changing
conditions [94].


Cost-effective: Digital technologies are essentially reducing the
cost in almost every area. Initial investment costs can be high for
novel technologies with a decline over time. DSC is essentially a
cost-effective way for organizations, not just because of its
utilization of technological enablers but also because the process
how the supply chain is managed with DSC creates cost efficiency
for organizations.


Scalability: Scaling supply chains up or down according to the
required circumstances often creates a colossal struggle for
organizations. When classical supply chains are integrated with
digitalization, however, scalability becomes less of an issue. This
brings easier optimization and duplication of processes and
simpler spotting of anomalies and errors [98,99].


Innovative: Excellence in DSC is a key feature so that DSCs are
always open for a change. The world is being swamped with novel
technologies at a seemingly faster rate than ever before. DSC


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 165






should always look for new ways to incorporate these innovations
into processes to remain competitive and ensure excellence in
supply chain. Todays’ innovations are becoming tomorrows’ idle,
inactive, dead technologies. Some examples include the evolution
of TVs from black and white to smart TVs or changes from paper
and pen to smart glasses in warehouses management for
optimized picking. Technologies inevitably change, it is in the
genes of innovation. Information becomes the basis for a
commercial enterprise which has not changed in thousands of
years. People who feel that today’s BD is just an improvement of
past information trends are as mislead as if they were to claim that
a stone tablet is essentially identical to a tablet computer or an
abacus is a same thing as a supercomputer [100]. These are just a
few of the many examples of innovative approaches to DSC across
various functions.


Proactive: DSC imposes proactive actions to prevent potential
disruptions. This can be made possible not only through
troubleshooting, but also by identifying latent issues in advance
through research. It demands a substantial amount of knowledge
and planning to coordinate these problems. DSC offers proactive
solutions to anticipate issues prior to their occurrence, an effective
analytics framework and operational intelligence to satisfy
digitally enabled consumers.


Eco-friendly: Supply chains have a certain level of impact on
the environment. If DSC does not place enough emphasis on


environment, it might lead to business disruption due to negative
press, environmental laws or public awareness, to name a few.
Finding a traditional supply chain with eco-friendly practices in
every single stage is a daunting task. Next-generation DSC can be
able to extend eco-friendly process capabilities.


3.3. Components and technologies of DSC


Several executives struggle simply to stem the tide without
making any profound change in their organizations when they face
with a fundamental change. Others look for new ways to jump
ahead of the curve. It can be observed that notable companies are
trying to digitalize their supply chain operations. From sensors and
cloud services to nanotech and BD, several technologies drive DSC
trends. There are many significant digitalization trends that could
be applied in a supply chain to greatly improve the future. With the
help of several reports published by consulting firms and other
academic researches on DSC, eleven different digitalization
technologies will be explored in this study. These eleven areas
are explained in Table 3.


4. Benefits, challenges and research gaps on DSC


Whether they are small or big organizations, companies need to
look at developing some type of digital organization capabilities


Table 3
DSC Technologies.


DSC
Technologies


Description DSC Challenges in Supply Chain


AR [43,88] AR is described as the extension of physical reality by adding layers of
computer generated information to the real environment. Information in
this context could be any kind of virtual object or content, including text,
graphics, video, sound, haptic feedback, Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
data, and even smell.


The challenges AR in DSC include social acceptance, addressing privacy, and
profitability for businesses to use it. Other challenges include optimized
picking operations and virtual testing of new supplier parts and packages to
reduce distribution of physical sample products.


BD [24,82] BD is an evolving term that is used to describe any large amount of
structured, semi-structured or unstructured data that has a potential to be
mined for information.


For millions of shipments made every day, their origins and destinations,
sizes, weights, contents, and locations, etc. are all tracked across global
delivery networks. But does this data tracking fully exploit value?


CC [66,69] CC delivers a network of virtual services so that users can access them from
anywhere in the world on subscription at competitive costs.


DSC, enabled by the CC, have clear challenges which, together, drive
unprecedented visibility, insights and flexibility while operating rapidly and
at scale. Losing the control over the data that was previously housed on
internal servers and/or computer hard drives, safety of the data on the web
and service outages situations are also some challenges.


R [69,85] R technology in Logistics is a branch of engineering that involves the
conception, design, manufacture, and operation of R.


Challenges on R includes it is not the speed of development, but the fear
humans, governments and regulators have towards the technology.
Flexibility, automated systems to have the ability to keep up with changing
demands, or worries on robots taking over all the jobs and whether they are
secure.


ST [86] ST is essential for robust detection and filling status, product quality,
packaging quality, equipment status in a wide range of field conditions.


Real-time analysis of data originating from sensors. Improved transaction
efficiency due to ubiquitous process control and factory optimization.
Necessity of deploying extensive and expensive infrastructure in geo-
location.


OC [81] OC is a multi-channel approach to sales that seeks to provide the consumers
with a seamless shopping experience whether the consumers is shopping
online from a desktop or mobile device, by telephone or in a bricks and
mortar store.


Direct sales to users and consumers with smaller lot sizes and different
central and regional warehouse needs.


IoT [83] IoT refers to the everyday objects that feature an IP address for internet
connectivity allowing them to send and receive data, and so communication
occurs between these objects and other network devices and systems.


The use of unique identifiers for various types of assets among different
industries on a global scale, seamless interoperability for exchanging sensor
information in heterogeneous environments, establishment of trust and
ownership of data and overcoming privacy issues.


SDV [87] SDV is a vehicle that is capable of sensing its environment and navigating
without human input.


To achieve a vehicle capable of driving itself, four basic interdependent
functions are required. These are navigation, situational analysis, motion
planning, and trajectory control. Beyond technological capability, some key
challenges include regulatory pressures, public acceptance, and liability.


UAV [101] UAV is an aircraft with no pilot on board, commonly known as a drone. UAVs
can be remote controlled aircraft or can fly autonomously based on pre-
programmed flight plans or more complex dynamic automation systems.


The regulatory environment, privacy concerns, and integration into existing
networks are substantial challenges for UAV. In addition to the tangible (and
technically controllable) challenges of congested airspace and inherent
risks, there is another, less defined area of concern in the public domain.


N and 3DP
[69]


N is the engineering of functional systems at the molecular scale and 3DP,
also known as additive manufacturing, refers to various processes used to
synthesize a three-dimensional object.


To successfully implement N and 3DP in logistics requires strong
collaboration, along with high levels of participation between different
players and competitors within the supply chain, and a common willingness
to invest.


166 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






since organizations will compete on supply chains in global level
ultimately. For global organizations, the DSC is the key for
organizations’ long-term growth and success. Some good exam-
ples are Google, Amazon, and Apple; each of them has ventured
many areas in addition to their core business and have leveraged
the advantages of hardware, software, networks, and the large user
base and the collected large amount of data from the large user
base. For instance, Amazon, the largest digital retailer, has
ventured into digital services, software services, CC, mobile
phones, e-readers, tablets, payments, television, media, entertain-
ment, and other areas [57]. A great deal of time and effort of
academics and industry managers are diverted to these activities.
Indeed, there are many things that still need to be done in order to
search for better supply chain structures and strategies. Lean
supply and lean manufacturing systems together with world-class
manufacturing, and continuous improvement concepts (Kaizen),
are all examples of developments that have been born out of these
concerns [102]. DSC, on the other hand, could be the way to
improve and get better supply chain structures and strategies.
Following sections review the challenges and benefits of DSC.


4.1. Challenges and issues of implementing DSC


Various problems can occur along the supply chain. Xu [57]
defines the primary challenges to building DSC as gathering all
required data from many disparate sources and ensuring the
accuracy of that information and developing a software architec-
ture and platform that can use the data to manage and execute the
supply chain. Since the length of chain involves internal and
external partners, it will be slow and prone to errors. Moreover,
existing large amounts of inventory may not be able to meet the
demand, logistics infrastructure can be insufficient and the quality
of goods can be hard to control. Some of these identified challenges
for DSC are presented as follows:


! Lack of planning: Deficiency of proper demand plan and
guidelines and tools [57,94].


! Lack of collaboration: Deficient collaboration with external
associates and deficient input from internal functions
[1,57,71,76].


! Wrong demand forecast: Inaccurate over optimistic forecasts for
demand, inventory, production and other data [57,103,104].


! Lack of information sharing: Companies’ reluctance on informa-
tion sharing [57,92].


! Silver bullet chase: The belief that everything will be fine
[57,102].


! Lack of knowledge: Deficiency of supply chain management
training and skills [57,102].


! Agility and Flexibility: Lack of required flexible and agile supply
chain management [1,57,102,104,105].


! High volatility: Lack of knowledge and skills in dealing with
volatility in supply chain management [57,76,102].


! Over confidence on suppliers: Relying on certain suppliers in
certain parts of the globe [57,102].


! Lack of integration: Deficient view on the integration of digital
and non-digital supply chain management [1,57,76,102].


4.2. Success factors for DSC


The core benefit of DSC is its ability to bring out the capacity of
extraordinary performance in customer satisfaction. The DSC
enables the creation of products and services designed with more
accurate information about customer needs, built with efficiency
and has locations with a quick and easy access of true customers. The
performance measurement in DSC is also very important. This


measure could be examined by ability of filling of orders till due day,
delivery time, supplier reliability, chain cost or delays, among many
others. Despite the many benefits of digitalization in supply chains,
only a handful of early industry adopters have integrated it as a core
process. One exception to this is in the farming industry; Monsanto
leads digital revolution on the world’s oldest industry. According to a
recent study, more than one third of 2000 respondents have started
implementing digitalization in their supply chains, and fully 72%
expect to have done so within five years [94]. Some of the reasons
why DSC adoption has been slow are the lack of awareness among
workforce and stakeholders about digital means and the lack of
required skills across employees and stakeholders. Therefore, the
widespread adoption of DSC will depend on the realization of these
critical success factors as follows:


! Real-Time Visibility: Dynamic, secure and interactive visibility
across the entire supply chain will improve the management of
DSC [67,72,78,102,106].


! Continuous collaboration: Capabilities are harmonized within
and beyond physical boundaries to increase collaboration
between involved actors of the supply chain [78,102,106].


! Alignment of suppliers: Aligning the interest of all the firms in
the supply chain with your own to create incentives for better
performance and developing trust (alignment) [57,66,69,78].


! Integration: Building the integration of digital and non-digital
supply chains so that a unified and whole view of inventory
across the firm can be achieved [57,66,69].


! Shared information: DSC allows easier information sharing on
sales forecast and production data [57,66,67,69,78,102].


! Highly evolved operating models: Product and service functions
can be altered easily to meet customers’ changing demands
[66,98,106].


! Adopting advanced analytics and analytics tools: Advanced data
analysis improves decision making. Gaining better understand-
ing and forecasting of the demand and solve previously
unsolvable and even unknown problems along the supply chain.
(e.g., BD and Data Analytics, etc.) [57,66,98,106].


! Automated execution: Seamless human-machine interactions
increase operational efficiency [65,66,69,73,78,79,106].


! Enhanced and accelerated innovation: Digital supply chains
inspire and abet innovations in designs, operations and customer
relationships [57,66,67,69,106].


! Maximum efficiency: Seamless integration of people, processes
and technology [66,73].


! Organizational flexibility: Digital plug-and play capabilities
make it easier to configure and re-configure [65–67].


! Personalized experiences, Customer-centricy: Channel-centric
supply networks support customized products and services
[1,57,66,69,98,106].


! Enhanced responsiveness: Better information and sophisticated
analytics can help accelerate responses to competitors’ moves,
technology shifts, and changing demand and supply signals
[57,66,67,69,78,98,106].


! Proactive prevention: Decision support systems driven by
predictive analytics can strengthen adaptability and reliability
[57,66,98,106].


! Last mile postponement: Swiftly repurposing organizational
assets assists on ensuring the supplies are aligned with evolving
demands [57,66,98,106].


4.3. Research gaps on DSC


One of the main objective of this study was to provide a
literature review on DSC research. Our search identified 105
relevant papers. The literature review also showed that very few


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 167






studies were actually conducted on DSC (see Tables 1 and 2) but
most of them were conducted on its enablers that focus on supply
chains. The distribution of papers found have been presented and
discussed. The literature review showed that while there is a
constant increase of papers published on the topic since 2010 (e.g.,
from 2 papers (1%) published in 2010 to 30 papers in 2016 (28%),
and 10 articles (10%) by Dec 2, 2017), the clear majority of studies
are still ‘industrial reports’ (see Fig. 2). Therefore, more research on
DSC is needed to be done by journals. Indeed, no articles were
identified among these outlets that is recognized as cutting edge
study. More significantly, papers should focus on the development
framework to transform, implement and adopt digitalization in the
context of supply chains.


Thus, this section provides a number of observations regarding
the applicability of digitalization in supply chains and identify the
gaps in the literature with respect to the potential of DSC in helping
address DSC benefits and challenges. Despite the recent interest in
the DSC trend due to its colossal potential and disruptive nature,
studies that address DSC benefits and challenges are still in their
early stages. As mentioned in the introduction, DSC offers
unprecedented advantages to all aspects of the supply chains,
providing automation to better collaboration, all enabled by
technologies like supply chain visibility, big data analytics, and the
cloud, etc. Therefore, DSC enables supply chains to respond to the
edge of the competition to transform digitally. Current studies are
still short of unlocking this potential. There are only piecemeal
literatures in isolated areas with inadequate effort that addresses
the entire DSC concept, as evidenced by the literature analysis in
Tables 1 and 2. Based on our classification of the literature on DSC,
we found that studies are still confined to isolated areas of their
enablers. Although we did not focus on the implementation of DSC
in our review, it is worth noting that there is not many research in
the implementation phase of DSC.


There are several research gaps in the current literature dealing
with DSC that can be identified from the current review. These gaps
can be summarized as follows:


! Lack of development frameworks that provide guidance for DSC
adoption in a context with clear guidelines and roadmaps. These
would aid in guiding managers as to which stages and where in
supply chains would managers deploy DSC, given that supply
chains may be at different steps of the DSC implementation. In
addition, development frameworks would provide assistance in
changing the management practices within the supply chains.


! Lack of tools and technologies that address supply chain
problems in an DSC environment. DSC is different from that of
a typical supply chain. Decisions in an DSC context requires new
tools and technologies that take into account digitalization
environment, such as the abundance of BD generated from ST
and IoT. DSC will affect maintenance, quality, inventory
management, production planning and procurement, among
other issues.


! There are numerous barriers to the implementation of DSC from
both managerial and technological perspectives. There’s rather a
significant change happening throughout the world. Organiza-
tions are at the edge of a competition to transform their supply
chains digitally [78]. Thus, DSC challenges and issues addresses
in Subsection 4.1 need to be unlocked by the help of DSC success
factors derived from extant literature. There is not much studies
on how to deal effectively with these.


Keeping in mind the derived knowledge from the literature on
DSC, we resume this study by pointing out a need of a framework
for developing DSC. In the following section, we use all the
knowledge gathered from the surveyed literature to establish this
state-of-the-art novel framework.


5. Framework for developing DSC


Successful supply chains operate with a clear vision, using
frameworks and roadmaps that define the way forward. The extant
literature is summarized into three main stages and their sub goals.
The synthesized literature is then utilized in developing the
roadmap which further paved the way towards designing the
development framework for DSC. Hence, this section presents a
framework for developing DSC. Fig. 4 displays the framework in a
visual structure based on a review of the literature.


By compiling a formal definition of DSC that is valid for all
organizations, an approach could be proposed to build an effective
DSC structure. The features, components and technology enablers,
challenges and success factors for developing the framework are
identified by reviewing the DSC literature as presented in detail at
the earlier sections. The taxonomy and review of available
literature on DSC is accomplished by considering major challenges,
success areas and enabling components and technologies with the
objective of managing and developing an effective DSC. Further
classification of the related literature is aimed at helping both
academics and practitioners to identify the key features and
success factors for effective operation and development of DSC.
Indeed, DSC increasingly allows supply chains to become an
integral part of decision making and strategic planning. To this end,
organizations can leverage and develop DSC to complement
different facets of their strategy and more effectively target their
specific needs.


Keeping in mind the insight on the DSC literature and proposed
framework for the development of DSC arises the question of how
it can be suitably implemented and verified in a typical supply
chain. Every supply chain will have a slightly different set of digital
development goals with different priorities. In addition to
rethinking and redesigning entire supply chains, the key desired
digital evaluation objectives for supply chains often map the areas
of Digitalization, Technology Implementation and Supply Chain
Management, which are vital steps for organizational alignment.
The main decomposition of the DSC development framework is
thus clearly defined.


By utilizing this framework, most of the supply chain managers
will be familiar with the basic DSC approach: assessing the supply
chains’ current digitalization state, establishing a vision for
technology implementation, and developing a transformation
road map for supply chain management in a DSC environment.
Elaboration of these areas, their decompositions and establish-
ment of their structure is the essence of DSC’s implementation in a
typical supply chain. Therefore, three main decompositions and
their structure will be elaborated next. The major issues and
challenges that need to be addressed are discussed using the
attributes used to categorize and review the literature. Although
implementation and verification of DSC in a typical supply chain
needs more comprehensive research focusing merely on these
steps. The findings of this study will be of interest to supply chain
managers and companies opting for digitally enabled organiza-
tions and fully transformed DSC. The details of the DSC
decomposition are presented in below subsections and the
framework for developing DSC is displayed in Fig. 5.


5.1. Digitalization


Being a DSC does necessarily not mean having the latest digital
technologies. It is mostly about aligning digital initiatives with
supply chain objectives and adopting a digital methodology to
realize the untapped potential of existing resources and capabili-
ties resulting in a higher level of performance [65]. By examining
the extant literature on DSC, we have seen that DSC process often
begins with Digitalization. Supply chains need to be clear about


168 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177










their digitalization policy and focus on improving their digitaliza-
tion capabilities they are going to build. It is not only important to
survive the digitalization megatrend but also to use it to their
advantage [107].


By establishing the first stage of DSC, we can further decompose
the digitalization stage which commences with Digitalization
Strategy. This process then extends to additional three areas:
Digital Organizations & Culture, Digital Operations and Digital
Products & Services. It then ends at customers by improving the
service levels and Digital Customer Experience to know them
better [108]. Thus, the goal of an effective digitalization process can
be decomposed into five distinctive sub-goals, each of which
presenting the stages of the digitalization process. They are
dependent on the successful execution of the respective method-
ologies. The framework for the digitalization of DSC is presented in
Fig. 6.


The Digitalization Strategy is an important step. Supply chains
would focus solely on solving current problems if they lack crucial
strategic instruments. This results in a failure to generate
continuous gains for their stakeholders. But most likely supply
chains don’t have a clear digital strategy. This situation has built an
untenable condition for many supply chains, considering that
digital technology is increasingly interwoven into the very fabric of
most establishments and organizations. Newest digital technolo-
gies provide an opportunity to enhance how supply chains
compete and create a foundation for outperforming rivals
near and far [109,110]. As further decomposition of digitalization
stage is followed, digitalization is branched into Digital Goal
Setting, Digital Strategy Formulation, and Digital Strategy


Implementation. Defining Digital Goal Setting is an important
step that decides on what digital strategy wants to achieve in and
separates what's important from what's irrelevant, or a distraction
in digitalization based on successful achievement of these goals.
The Digital Strategy Formulation process refers to the process of
selecting the best fitting objective in realization of supply chains’
goals and so accomplish its vision [111]. The Digital Strategy
Implementation addresses the questions of “how, when, where,
and who” to reach the intended objectives and goals, thus focusing
on the entire supply chain.


The Digital Organization & Culture is the second stage in
digitalization. When all digital thinking individuals and organiza-
tions come together, common intelligence on digitalization can be
reached. Nowadays the discussion is about consumers being
digitalized, who demand novel digital products and services each
passing day. First, there is a need for highest level (c-level)
executives who understand and grasp this transformation notion.
Executives who define their organizations’ digital vision, mission,
planning and aims need to promote digital managers and employ-
ees. Further decomposition of digital organization & culture is
reduced to Analysing of the Current Organization & Culture,
Digital Organization & Culture Management and Transform into
Digital Organization & Culture. Organizational culture is like an
employee’s attitude and is a strong determining factor in its
adaptability. If the established culture resists to change, the result
will be a divided organization: one part moving into the future, the
other part clinging to the traditional past, leading to delays for the
much needed transformation [112]. Thus, first step is assessing the
current situation of organization and culture in terms of its


Fig. 4. A framework for the development of DSC.


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 169






digitalization aspects. After this analysis is done, digitalization has
to be managed and fully transformed into DSC. In today’s digital era,
change happens at tremendous speeds. Supply chains need to
analyzeand rethinktheirorganizational structure in order notto fall
behind in the competition. Organizations will lose their business to
competitors if they cannot keep up and respond rapidly. It is


decisive, therefore, to implement a digital organization strategy and
initiate the digital evolution sooner rather than later and develop a
digital organizational structure. Built on this foundation, supply
chains can develop their own digital vision, design new digital
organizational models and decide on acquiring strategies for the
necessary skills and capabilities of digitalization [108].


Fig. 5. Integration framework for the development of DSC.


Fig. 6. Decomposed framework for the digitalization of DSC.


170 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






Some key things must happen to achieve digital transformation
as a part of Digital Operations. Advanced digital solutions,
powered by the BD, CC, etc. and supported by IoT or ST, etc., can
expand supply chain processes in numerous ways. For instance, BD
can assist in-bound logistics to run more smoothly by tracking the
movement of goods and services; CC can be useful in creating
uniform business processing platforms; and mobile technologies
can support people to perform their work anywhere, anytime and
on any device [113]. Supply chains should be able to evolve at the
same pace and adapt more swiftly to continuous, instant and
prompt changes. Supply chains also need to support workers’
freedom and flexibility to work anywhere, anytime, and on any
device, to improve their performance and apply the decided
strategy [108]. “Worker Enablement, Digital Operations Man-
agement and Implement Digital Operations” attributes are
defined in digital operations stage. Worker Enablement could be
described, in essence, as the virtualization of individual level work.
It separates the work process from the location of the work with
the accumulative usage of email and digital communication and
collaboration tools, etc., employees can now communicate with
costumers or colleagues who might have never met face to face or
in areas they have never been. Digital Operations Management is
where transactional systems offer managers deeper knowledge of
a specific product, region and consumers, allowing decisions to be
taken on actual data and not on assumptions. It makes it possible to
compare status across several areas and adjust capacities, thus
making it possible to take better decisions about how to manage
performance and prioritize. Implement Digital Operations strate-
gy differs from operations management. There are two perspec-
tives on implementing operations strategy such as: Structure and
System Implementation, and Monitor and Improve Implement
Operations. This establishes the efficient set of operations
strategies. Implement Operations is totally different from employ-
ees and operations management. This step finalizes the digital
operations stage.


Almost every successful supply chain has put novel digital
products and services to its center. At the same time, service design
practices expand by the ubiquity of digitalization. The rhythm and
structure of the customer experience has been changed by this
wave of new Digital Products & Services [114]. This stage is further
decomposed into Customer Requirement Lifecycle, Product &
Service Ecosystem, and Customization & Personalization. The gap
in the long-term service experience is bridged and effectively
extended to the lifetime of the customer relationship by the digital
products and services. The second attribute in which the digital
services or products are woven into the ecosystems of other
services and products to be more viable. Thus, services and
products comprise a broader services and brand experiences.
Customization & Personalization are the building blocks of novel
digitally-enhanced products and services. This makes it possible to
deliver individual experiences to large numbers of groups.


The Digital Customer Experience is not a guesswork. It is rather
about the exploration of customers, their behaviors, their person-
alities and expectations. DSC can only develop when executives are
armed with this information. Developing DSC requires a transfor-
mation of the entire customer experience. Several ways in which
DSC is transforming customer experience include: social media
exploration in understanding customer dissatisfaction and satis-
faction, use of digital media for brand promotion, online
community building to build loyalty with clients, making products
that improve branding in lifestyle communities, structuring
analytical capabilities to get to know customers more in detail,
technology usage to improve communication in-person sales,
integration of customer purchase data to offer better and
personalized sales and customers services, etc. [113]. Customer
Understanding is where organizations are starting to take full


advantage of former investments in system to gain in depth
understanding of analytics based segmentations, market seg-
ments, specific geographies, and socially informed knowledge.
Top-Line Growth is where organizations are applying digitaliza-
tion to enhance in-person sales discussions, improve predictive
marketing and streamline customer processes. Customer Touch-
points are where organizations services can be enhanced
drastically by digital initiatives, provide customer services, cross
channel coherence and self-service.


5.2. Technology implementation


The Technology Implementation process differs from Digitali-
zation process given that this goal focuses on the successful
implementation acquired by the DSC efforts. Technology imple-
mentation process leverages technology enablers in the DSC. These
key technologies " some mature, some emerging " now serve as
the foundational building blocks in the new DSC ecosystem. Taking
a holistic view across all these enablers can help maximize
business benefits and unlock new forms of value in the coming
years. Introducing technological change into an organization
presents a different set of challenges. In a market that is
increasingly driven by technological enablers, supply chains need
to implement the hottest innovative solutions to keep their
competitive edge and access new opportunities in fresh markets.
This is an ongoing process to keep supply chains up-to-date, but
this also takes a certain time. Thus, it branches to Management
Process, Human and Technology Relationship, the Formation of
Technology Infrastructure, and Technology Enablers. These goals
are the building blocks of effective Technology Implementation
process. Fig. 7 present the decomposed framework for the
technology implementation of DSC


Technology implementation requires project management.
Every implementation methodology should include a detailed
description of which tasks need to be accomplished and which
equipment need to be acquired during the implementation period.
This sophisticated planning helps a DSC to anticipate costs, avoid
delays and minimize disruptions in work processes that are caused
by previously used technologies. Workforces can also benefit from
team work during the implementation and evaluation [115].


Human and technology relationship is another goal of effective
technology implementation process. People and technology go
hand-in-hand. The human evolution has made technology evolve,
which helps people to be more adaptable. People need social
interactions for their survival and technology plays a pivotal role in
this. The human dependency on technology is growing at an
exponential rate. In the coming decades technology will dominate
the way humans interact [116]. Using novel technological means
could be counterproductive if the workforce is not fully prepared to
operate and take control of new resources. Therefore, proper
training and adaptation of human and technology is a priority. The
human and technology relationship should also include user
training, interaction and collaboration sub-goals in order to be
effective [117].


Almost all novel technologies create a different set of risks and
new types of vulnerabilities. The technology implementation
process should take these into account and define the necessary
steps to establish the technology infrastructure. Defining the
nature of the infrastructure during the implementation process
can also help better define the technological requirements and
priorities [118,119]. Formation of a technology infrastructure is
especially important for any supply chain looking to move to the
next level by taking the steps needed to transform digitally. If a
company wants to shift out of survival mode and take the next step
towards becoming a big successful company, the technology
infrastructure is needed to support this growth [120].


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 171






The last goal in a technology implementation process is
defining the technology enablers. Depending on the nature of
the organization, these can be a need to support the achievement
of the organization’s strategy, enable implementation within
appropriate timescale, or identify alternative ways for a new
technological niche. After determining desired requirements, the
basic strategy shall be defined to achieve the intended goals [121].


5.3. Supply chain management


Redesigning a supply chain system to achieve a set of strategic
objectives involves making a series of complex decisions over time.
Making these decisions in a way that supports supply chains’ high-
level objectives requires an understanding of how detailed design
issues affect the interactions among various components of a
supply chain system [69]. This consecutive goal of development for
DSC is an effective supply chain management process which
focuses on the main goal of DSC transformation. This process is
enhanced with digitalization and technology implementation.
Integration, Automation, Reconfiguration, Analytics and Process
goals and their sub-goals are determined given that supply chain
management process follows a course and each step depends on its
antecedent. Fig. 8 presents the decomposed framework for the
supply chain management of DSC.


Few authors have considered supply chain integration through
multiple stage constructs. Different stages are used to characterize
the supply chain integration concept. Sahin and Robinson
[122,123] proposed the degree of information sharing and
decision-making coordination as two major stages of supply chain
integration at the operational level. Lee outlined three different


stages of supply chain integration: information integration,
coordination and resource sharing and organizational relationship
linkage. Bagchi [124] categorized supply chain integration into five
interrelated stages: information sharing and communication
across the supply chains, collaboration and shared decision
making with network partners, collaboration leading to risk, cost
and gain sharing, sharing of skills, ideas and institutional culture
and organization [125]. A truly integrated supply chain does more
than just cost reduction. It also creates value for organizations,
their partners, and their shareholders. Information sharing is the
foundation for the integration. The next dimension is the
coordination and resource sharing, then comes the organiza-
tional linkages which enable sharing of risks, costs, and gains
[126].


Automation is something that should be further embraced, not
feared. Accuracy is critically important for the supply chain as
small mistakes can have large impacts for the entire organization.
Additionally, with goods and services crossing many borders,
supply chain managers must keep compliance and regulation on
top of their agenda [127]. Thus, it branches into Robotic
Technologies, Process Automation and Intelligent Processes.
Automation is an intelligent organizational process that delivers
responsiveness and agility which is created as an outcome of
effective usage of robotics technology. Through automation, supply
planning, forecasting, sales, connection, replenishment,
manufacturing, distribution activities and procurement, etc.
become seamlessly automated and straight forward processes.


Many organizations have reconfigured their supply chain
during the last decade. The most prominent drivers behind this
trend have been global competition, increased focus on market


Fig. 8. Decomposed framework for the supply chain management of DSC.


Fig. 7. Decomposed framework for the technology implementation of DSC.


172 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






requirements, advances in information and communication
technology, and development in international freight transport
systems [128]. Digital requirements also force organizations to
reconfigure their supply chains. Therefore, supply chain reconfig-
uration process is decomposed into three sub-goal: Organiza-
tional reconfiguration, which is needed to change the structural
boundaries of the organizations, Network reconfiguration, which
is needed to minimize the risk in supply chain under integrated
digital technology, and Interoperability, which enables discover-
ability and interaction in the supply chains and is capable of
improving the supply chain performance in the presence of risk.


In classical supply chains, standard reporting is commonly
made via spreadsheets. Such practices are not sufficient to achieve
competitive advantage. Supply chains that use data for inventory
planning and forecasting across their distribution networks can
acquire additional advantages from advanced analytics [69].
Supply Chain Analytics is also decomposed into three sub-goals:
Real-Time Execution Decisions, which gives a competitive edge,
Process Optimization, which allows effective and efficient
reaction, and Advanced Forecasting, which makes the process
more accurate, reliable, and less costly.


The Supply Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) model was
developed by the Supply Chain Council with the help of seventy of
the world’s leading manufacturing companies. The SCOR model is a
management tool used to address, improve, and communicate
supply chain management decisions within a company, its
suppliers and customers [129]. It helps to explain the processes
along the entire supply chain and provides a basis for how to
improve those processes. It has been described as the most
promising model for strategic decision making in supply chains
[130]. Supply Chain Process focuses on five areas of the supply
chain: plan, source, make, deliver, and return. These areas repeat
again and again along the supply chain.


6. Managerial implications


“Digital Supply Chain” is one of latest hottest buzzwords in the
industry. Specialists proclaim that digitalization will revolutionize
logistics industry and supply chain management. Current invest-
ment in technology suggests DSC’s importance; supply chain
executives expect DSC to bring substantial economic benefits.
Supply chain in itself is a business, rather than a department within
a business and digital enterprises rely on DSCs [131]. Organizations
with DSC and highly digital operations can expect 4.1% annual
efficiency gains while boosting revenue by 2.9% per year [94].
Companies cannot opt-out digital transformation and expect to
survive. A recent study by MIT and Capgemini attaches significant
competitive advantage to companies that are on the leading edge
of this transformation. Those companies that do have a strong
vision perform the best, while laggers are already declining [132].
Still, some practitioners fear that the importance of DSC is
exaggerated and perceives it as a little more than an extension of
conventional logistics and supply chains structure. Studies and
research from supply chain point of view to digitalization is
lacking, like many other popular topics. There are very few
publications that discuss the challenges of using DSC, or better yet,
that explore the opportunities for new practices and theories that
DSC might bring about. In fact, there is practically no consistency in
defining DSC, categorizing its aim, or establishing its function in
supply chain management.


This study poses some questions here which stem from a need
to better understand the role of digitalization in supply chains. It
reviews DSC approaches from both academic and industrial points
of view. Agile Elephant consulting firm defines digital transforma-
tion as the process of shifting organizations from legacy
approaches to new ways of working and thinking using digital,


social, mobile and emerging technologies. This involves a change in
leadership, different thinking, encouragement of innovation and
new business models, incorporating digitalization of assets and an
increased use of technology to improve the experience of
organizations’ employee, customer, supplier, partner and stake-
holder [133]. 75% of retailers and manufacturers describe online
data as a key for effective supply chains, but most of them still
insist on sharing the information via fax and phone [134]. This
small example shows that there still exists a huge gap between
what organizations expect to have of DSC and their preparedness
for participation. The study then extends to understanding how
closely scientific views correspond to definitions of DSC. Further, it
is discussed how supply chain executives use DSC to expose DSC’s
technology enablers and key success factors. These key enablers
and success factors described here suggest that DSC makes services
more valuable, accessible and affordable with consistent, agile and
effective outcome in supply chain structure. The key here is
digitalization, which offers both flexibility and efficiency. Apart
from the apparent hype around DSC, it is mostly argued solely from
the eye of the customers. However, this is only a part of the story.
As it progresses from strategy to execution, it is quite significant for
organizations to concretely target DSC outcomes. Consequently,
the goal is set as digitalization for supply chains since the main goal
of the development framework is to provide guidelines for
successful DSC management. Thus, the adoption of the develop-
ment framework can help supply chains transform to a technology
driven DSC and to keep up with the industry in terms of
performance improvement. To move the innovative concept of
DSC in the complex environment of the supply chains towards new
frontiers, further efforts in practice and science are indispensable.


The purpose of this study is to provide an insight to the DSC
through investigating existing DSC literature in both academic and
industrial world and, therefore, to identify the appropriate factors
and means to propose a new development framework. Since the
inevitable trend of digitalization in all areas of business and daily
life, DSC have been the prominent to avoid rigidity or inefficiency
and to achieve competitive advantages. This is a focused literature
review prepared after analysing 105 articles related to the DSC. The
academic literatures are analysed based on research subject,
objective, methods and their contribution to the academia. Then
reviewed result is presented to establish foundation for the
development framework for DSC. The review reveals that: several
problems in current DSC literature have been identified as
profound non-existence of DSC framework; the reviewed papers’
identification of eleven main features of DSC, their components
and technologies, ten DSC challenges and fifteen DSC success
factors; increasing the significance of specific guidance or
integrated methodologies on need of DSC in supply chain
literature. Then, a comprehensive DSC development framework
has been developed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
focused study that reviews the DSC in detail, comparing the
outcome of the analysis, identifies current DSC literature problems
and gaps, new DSC trends and shifts in the way that DSC are
evaluated and typical supply chains are transformed into DSC
proposing a new holistic DSC development framework. In addition,
it identifies future research trends. Hence, the primary aim of our
research agenda in Fig. 1 is to develop the state of practice
development framework by applying a systematic literature
review and analysis in this paper. Thus, the authors believe that
this review and classification provides valuable insight for
academics and practitioners about the importance of DSC which
can then be adapted, explored and expanded for transforming
supply chain organizations. In addition, the ways information and
technology are consumed and delivered through CC, BD, and IoT,
etc. are transforming how organizations compete. If any supply
chain organization wants to survive and compete with others, they


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 173














should implement digitalization in their supply chains and become
a DSC. In conclusion, the presented framework can be employed as
a strategic assessment instrument by academics and practitioners
to measure their supply chain performance in a DSC environment,
and/or the development framework can be further stretched to
creating a novel DSC structure from scratch. Consequently, the next
step would be to implement the proposed framework in a typical
supply chain with real requirements; which would provide a better
comprehension of the limitations and further modifications
required for the refinement of this framework.


6.1. Discussion on DSC concept


Digitalization has touched upon all aspects of organizations. SC
and logistics are no exception. Today, an emerging worldwide
trend in supply chain management is a focus shift from the
classical supply chain to DSC. Technological means such as IoT, CC,
BD etc. empower organizations to transform their existing
‘traditional paper-based’ or ‘hybrid combination of technology’
supported processes of SC structure into collaborative digital
models with higher flexibility, agility, and openness. Unlike
existing SC structures, which have resulted in rigid organizational
configurations, inaccessible data and fragmented relationships
with partners, DSC enables process automation, flexibility and
digital management for corporate assets. Examples of this trend
are visible in various technologies such as RFID, GPS and ST. In a
supply chain, the aim is to get the right item, at the right time, in
the right place, in the right quantity, in the right condition, and at
the right (low) cost. This could be accomplished with DSC to
address today’s customer demands.


Selecting the most suitable technological solutions and
reaping the maximum benefits of the digital means requires
supply chains to internalize digitalization as an integral part of
their overall operations methodology and their organizational
structure. Localized, detached initiatives, and rigid silo-based
operations pose severe threats to competitiveness in an
increasingly digital world. Authors believe that a comprehensive
approach to digital evolution of supply chain starts with a
digitalization and technology implementation process which will
set the direction for DSC management to reach its goal. Having
DSC will not only enable any organization to grasp the untapped
potential of their existing capability, but also to achieve higher
performance and ultimately create greater value. The next
generation supply chains must be stronger and more agile. They
must be able to have the right people and skill sets, processes, and
tools in the right places to drive efficiency and effectiveness. To
achieve these objectives, supply chains must work on initiatives
that will prepare them for the digital era. Meanwhile, technolo-
gies such as CC, BD and IoT will be adopted by more and more
supply chain managers. Opinions and insights of this review can
be used by academics and practitioners for applying digitalization
notions in supply chains and logistics. Hence, researchers and
business managers can extend this area of research by upgrading
and transforming the classical supply chain understanding into a
DSC. Based on the review and findings of this study, we
recommend future research in the implementation of DSC
industry application. All other aspects of DSC should also be
examined with real data, especially implementation of develop-
ment framework, as well as digital transformation of a specific
industry application.


6.2. Limitations and further research trends


This review paper is a state-of-the-art study within the given
field of research on DSC. Thus, it summarizes prior research on DSC,
critically consolidates and examines the contributions of past


research. However, this paper has a number of limitations. The
following areas summarize these potential limitations:


! Collated documents in this literature review are based mainly on
findings from academic journals or industrial reports (See Fig. 2).
The inclusion of additional academic journals in the future can
enhance this review’s findings.


! The findings of this review are based on the search of mentioned
databases by providing the input keywords. Since search is very
sensitive to these keywords, studies which have slightly different
inputs may be left out.


! It is significant to illuminate that, in this paper, a systematic
literature review methodology has been applied in which each
database is searched separately and the collected documents are
selected just before the analysis steps. A different approach can
be used for collating these documents found in databases.


! The review period spanned over the last 6 years (2002–2017). We
deem this is demonstrative of the related literature on
methodologies for DSC. Even though the findings are not
exhaustive, we consider that they are comprehensive as they
cover many highly ranked academic journals.


! The illustrated DSC framework aims at deploying the integration
among digitalization, technology implementation and supply
chain management. We have not included the further decom-
position of the DSC model, since it is out of scope of our research.


Notforgettingtheaforementionedlimitations, thefollowingfuture
research trends on DSC are based on an elaborate literature review as
well as the past working experience of authors. Further analysis of
these suggestions can generate novel knowledge and robust theories
in the area. Therefore, the following areas are proposed:


! This study recommends further research into industrial real-case
applications for the proposed DSC framework, which is
illustrated in Fig. 4.


! Companies from different industrial backgrounds have their own
methodologies for DSC, depending on their specific purpose of
using novel digital technologies. Therefore, key trends for future
DSC necessitates a distinct roadmap for each to improve the
digital transformation of its DSC tasks. The presented classifica-
tion can, therefore, be further enhanced to inform both academic
and practitioners by making sub-frameworks for each industry.


! Digitalization will transform the way supply chains operate. In
order to suitably implement and verify the development
framework, presented stages should be followed and assessed
in a typical supply chain.


! Even though the advantages and limitations of DSC have been
discussed at an academic level, further enhancements are still
required in several areas of DSC in order to provide a robust,
reliable and flexible solution for practical implementation of DSC
into industrial real-case applications.


! Furthermore, the benefits and challenges of DSC can be explored
to better understand the feasibility and effectiveness of the
proposed framework.


! Finally, the components and technologies of DSC can be
integrated to other existing supply chain related studies in both
academic publications and industrial reports.


DSC is very far from deploying its full potential, and, as noted in
this research, there are a number of areas that require immediate
attention.


7. Concluding remarks


This study deals with the digitalization of supply chains, a topic
of great interest both for practitioners and researchers. It is well-


174 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177






written and organized in a consistent structure which helps to
highlight the main proposal, based on an approach for the
development of a DSC. The results of this study aim to answer the
questions such as what the current state of DSC is in the academic
and industrial studies, as well as what the DSC future develop-
ments look like, and how the existing importance of digitalization
can be integrated into supply chain or logistics, etc. In order to
describe the state-of-the-art of within the DSC field, a summary of
the papers is provided, knowledge gaps in the given research
stream is identified and the characteristics of past research are
consolidated. In addition to this extensive discussion on future
trends on DSC, a DSC framework is developed according to the
advantages, weaknesses and limitations of existing DSC literature.
It intends to fill the gap of past studies regarding the construction
of a complete conceptual or theoretical framework. The proposed
framework aims at identifying the features, components and
technology enablers, challenges and success factors for developing
a DSC. Hence, the present review and framework can provide
insights to both academicians and practitioners in their application
of DSC. In terms of future research of this study, the three main
stages of DSC are integrated into the development framework.
Further research is needed to evaluate and assess the relative
prominence of the framework stages, to be implemented and
verified in a typical supply chain.


Acknowledgment


This study is financially supported by Galatasaray University
Research Fund (Projects number: 17.402.001 and 17.402.004).


References


[1] S. Penthin, R. Dillman, Digital SCM, www.bearingpoint.com, Germany, 2015.
[2] S. Tiwari, H.M. Wee, Y. Daryanto, Big data analytics in supply chain


managementbetween 2010 and 2016: Insights to industries, Comput. Ind.
Eng. 115 (2018) 319–330, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.11.017.


[3] P. Farahani, C. Meier, J. Wilke, Digital supply chain management agenda for
the automotive supplier industry, Shap. Digit. Enterp., Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2017, pp. 157–17210.1007/978-3-319-40967-2_8.


[4] E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch, Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future
prospects on logistics, Comput. Ind. 89 (2017) 23–34, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002.


[5] M. Merlino, I. Spro"ge, The augmented supply chain, Procedia Eng. 178 (2017)
308–318, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.01.053.


[6] M.A.A. Majeed, T.D. Rupasinghe, Internet of things (IoT) embedded future
supply chains for industry 4.0: an assessment from an ERP-based fashion
apparel and footwear industry, Int. J. Supply Chain Manag. 6 (2017) 25–40.


[7] T. Nguyen, L. ZHOU, V. Spiegler, P. Ieromonachou, Y. Lin, Big data analytics in
supply chain management: a state-of-the-art literature review, Comput.
Oper. Res. (2017), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.07.004 ISSN 0305-
0548 (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0305054817301685).


[8] M. Ben-Daya, E. Hassini, Z. Bahroun, Internet of things and supply chain
management: a literature review, Int. J. Prod. Res. (2017) 1–24, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1402140.


[9] K. Korpela, J. Hallikas, T. Dahlberg, Digital supply chain transformation
toward blockchain integration, Proc. 50th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. (2017)
4182–4191. http://hdl.handle.net/10125/41666.


[10] R. Michel, The evolution of the digital supply chain, Logist. Manag. (2017) 1.
[11] V. Scuotto, F. Caputo, M. Villasalero, M. Del Giudice, A multiple buyer–


supplier relationship in the context of SMEs’ digital supply chain
management, Prod. Plan. Control. 28 (2017) 1378–1388, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1375149.


[12] M. Vanderroost, P. Ragaert, J. Verwaeren, B. De Meulenaer, B. De Baets, F.
Devlieghere, The digitization of a food package’s life cycle: existing and
emerging computer systems in the logistics and post-logistics phase,
Comput. Ind. 87 (2017) 15–30, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
compind.2017.01.004.


[13] G. Buyukozkan, F. Gocer, An extention of ARAS methodology based on
interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy group decision making for digital supply
chain, 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst., IEEE (2017) 1–6, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/FUZZ-IEEE.2017.8015680.


[14] G. Buyukozkan, F. Gocer, An extension of MOORA approach for group decision
making based on interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy numbers in digital
supply chain, 2017 Jt. 17th World Congr. Int. Fuzzy Syst. Assoc. 9th Int. Conf.


Soft Comput. Intell. Syst., IEEE (2017) 1–6, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IFSA-
SCIS.2017.8023358.


[15] R. Addo-Tenkorang, P.T. Helo, Big data applications in operations/supply-
chain management: a literature review, Comput. Ind. Eng. 101 (2016) 528–
543, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.09.023.


[16] A. Gunasekaran, T. Papadopoulos, R. Dubey, S.F. Wamba, S.J. Childe, B. Hazen,
et al., Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational
performance, J. Bus. Res. 70 (2017) 308–317, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2016.08.004.


[17] B.T. Hazen, J.B. Skipper, J.D. Ezell, C.A. Boone, Big data and predictive analytics
for supply chain sustainability: A theory-driven research agenda, Comput.
Ind. Eng. 101 (2016) 592–598, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cie.2016.06.030.


[18] M. Kumar, G. Graham, P. Hennelly, J. Srai, How will smart city production
systems transform supply chain design: a product-level investigation, Int. J.
Prod. Res. 54 (2016) 7181–7192, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2016.1198057.


[19] T. Papadopoulos, A. Gunasekaran, R. Dubey, N. Altay, S.J. Childe, S. Fosso-
Wamba, The role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains
for sustainability, J. Clean. Prod. 142 (2017) 1108–1118, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.059.


[20] L. Wu, X. Yue, A. Jin, D.C. Yen, Smart supply chain management: a review and
implications for future research, Int. J. Logist. Manag. 27 (2016) 395–417, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-02-2014-0035.


[21] K.-J. Wu, C.-J. Liao, M.-L. Tseng, M.K. Lim, J. Hu, K. Tan, Toward sustainability:
using big data to explore the decisive attributes of supply chain risks and
uncertainties, J. Clean. Prod. 142 (2017) 663–676, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.040.


[22] R. Zhao, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, T. Huang, An optimization model for green supply
chain management by using a big data analytic approach, J. Clean. Prod. 142
(2017) 1085–1097, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.006.


[23] R.Y. Zhong, S.T. Newman, G.Q. Huang, S. Lan, Big Data for supply chain
management in the service and manufacturing sectors: challenges,
opportunities, and future perspectives, Comput. Ind. Eng. 101 (2016) 572–
591, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.07.013.


[24] G. Wang, A. Gunasekaran, E.W.T. Ngai, T. Papadopoulos, Big data analytics in
logistics and supply chain management: certain investigations for research
and applications, Intern. J. Prod. Econ. 176 (2016) 98–110, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.03.014.


[25] B. Cortés, A. Boza, D. Pérez, L. Cuenca, Internet of things applications on
supply chain management, Int. J. Comput. Electr. Autom. Control Inf. Eng. 9
(2015) 2204–2209.


[26] R.-Y. Chen, Autonomous tracing system for backward design in food supply
chain, Food Control 51 (2015) 70–84, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodcont.2014.11.004.


[27] S. FossoWamba, S. Akter, Big data analytics for supply chain management: a
literature review and research agenda, Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process. (2015)
61–72, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24626-0_5.


[28] Z.D.R. Gnimpieba, A. Nait-Sidi-Moh, D. Durand, J. Fortin, Using internet of
things technologies for a collaborative supply chain: application to tracking
of pallets and containers, Procedia Comput. Sci. 56 (2015) 550–557, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.251.


[29] N. Gospic, B. Bakmaz, Machine-to-Machine communications toward smart
logistics systems, 2nd Logist. Int. Conf., Belgrade (2015) 191–196.


[30] E. Hofmann, Big data and supply chain decisions: the impact of volume,
variety and velocity properties on the bullwhip effect, Int. J. Prod. Res. 7543
(2015) 1–19, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1061222.


[31] N.K.G. Isasi, E.M. Frazzon, M. Uriona, Big data and business analytics in the
supply chain: a review of the literature, IEEE Lat. Am. Trans. 13 (2015) 3382–
3391, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLA.2015.7387245.


[32] R. Mehmood, G. Graham, Big data logistics: a health-care transport capacity
sharing model, Procedia Comput. Sci. 64 (2015) 1107–1114, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.566.


[33] T. Schoenherr, C. Speier-Pero, Data science, predictive analytics, and big data
in supply chain management: current state and future potential, J. Bus. Logist.
36 (2015) 120–132, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12082.


[34] S. Mohr, O. Khan, 3D printing and its disruptive impacts on supply chains of
the future, Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 5 (2015) 20–24. http://timreview.ca/
article/942.


[35] K.H. Tan, Y. Zhan, G. Ji, F. Ye, C. Chang, Harvesting big data to enhance supply
chain innovation capabilities: an analytic infrastructure based on deduction
graph, Int. J. Prod. Econ. 165 (2015) 223–233, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2014.12.034.


[36] P. Tadejko, Application of internet of things in Logistics–Current challenges,
Int. Soc. Manuf. Serv. Manag. Eng. 7 (2015) 54–64, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.12846/j.em.2015.04.07.


[37] R.Y. Zhong, G.Q. Huang, S. Lan, Q.Y. Dai, X. Chen, T. Zhang, A big data approach
for logistics trajectory discovery from RFID-enabled production data, Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 165 (2015) 260–272, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2015.02.014.


[38] B.T. Hazen, C.A. Boone, J.D. Ezell, L.A. Jones-Farmer, Data quality for data
science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management: an
introduction to the problem and suggestions for research and applications,
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 154 (2014) 72–80, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2014.04.018.


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 175



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0010





http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0020

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0030

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.07.004

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305054817301685

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305054817301685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0040

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1402140

http://hdl.handle.net/10125/41666

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0055

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1375149

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0060

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.01.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0065

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FUZZ-IEEE.2017.8015680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0070

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IFSA-SCIS.2017.8023358

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0080

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0085

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.06.030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0090

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2016.1198057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0095

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0100

http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-02-2014-0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0105

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0120

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.03.014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0130

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.11.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0140

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.251

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0160

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.566

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0165

http://timreview.ca/article/942

http://timreview.ca/article/942

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0175

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0180

http://dx.doi.org/10.12846/j.em.2015.04.07

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0185

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.02.014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0190

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.04.018




[39] J. Leveling, M. Edelbrock, B. Otto, Big data analytics for supply chain
management, IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Eng. Eng. Manag., IEEE (2014) 918–922, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEEM.2014.7058772.


[40] I.V. Rozados, B. Tjahjono, Big data analytics in supply chain management:
trends and related research, 6th Int Conf. Oper. Supply Chain Manag, Bali,
2014.


[41] X. Wang, N. Liu, The Application of Internet of Things in Agricultural means of
production supply chain management, Adv. Mater. Res. 6 (2014) 2304–2310.
http://www.scientific.net/AMR.926-930.4118.


[42] B. Bhargava, R. Ranchal, L. BenOthmane, Secure information sharing in digital
supply chains, 2013 3rd IEEE Int. Adv. Comput. Conf. (2013) 1636–1640, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IAdCC.2013.6514473.


[43] A. Cirulis, E. Ginters, Augmented reality in logistics, Procedia Comput. Sci. 26
(2013) 14–20, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.12.003.


[44] E. Ginters, A. Cirulis, G. Blums, Markerless outdoor AR-RFID solution for
logistics, Procedia Comput. Sci. 25 (2013) 80–89, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.procs.2013.11.010.


[45] M.A. Waller, S.E. Fawcett, Data science, predictive analytics, and big data: a
revolution that will transform supply chain design and management, J. Bus.
Logist. 34 (2013) 77–84, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12010.


[46] C. Sun, Application of RFID technology for logistics on internet of things,
AASRI Procedia 1 (2012) 106–111, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
aasri.2012.06.019.


[47] J. Wagenaar, The impact of the Internet of Things on revenue in supply chains,
17th Twente Student Conf IT, Netherlands, 2012.


[48] Ç. Aktepe, Lojistik işletemelerinde bulut bilişim uygulamalarının
de!gerlendirilmesi, Dokuz Eylül Üniversitesi, 2015, 2018.


[49] M.E. Aviles, The Impact of Cloud Computing in Supply Chain Collaborative
Relationships, Collaborative Advantage and Relational Outcomes, Georgia
Southern University, 2015.


[50] F. Kache, Dealing with Digital Information Richness in Supply Chain
Management–A Review and a Big Data Analytics Approach, University of
Kassel, 2015, 2018. http://www.uni-kassel.de/upress/online/OpenAccess/
978-3-86219-926-6.OpenAccess.pdf.


[51] B. Tor!gul, Nesnelerin _Interneti ile Kapalı Döngü Tedarik Zinciri
Optimizasyonu: Yeni Bir Model Önerisi, Selçuk Üniversitesi, 2015.


[52] M. Aikaterini, Impact of IoT Enabled Service Solutions in the Downstream
Automotive Supply Chain, KTH University, 2014.


[53] D. Gantzia, M.E. Sklatinioti, Cloud Computing in the 3PL Industry, Jönköping
University, 2014.


[54] Z. Pang, Technologies and Architectures of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) for
Health and Well-being, KTH – Royal Institute of Technology, 2013.


[55] T. Keller, Mining the Internet of Things: Detection of False-Positive RFID Tag
Reads Using Low-Level Reader Data, University of St. Gallen, 2011.


[56] X. Li, Y. Lu, University of GAVLE, Strategy Development of SMEs in the Internet
of Things era: Case Study on Chinese Enterprises, 2010.


[57] J. Xu, Managing Digital Enterprise, Atlantis Press, Paris, 2014, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.2991/978-94-6239-094-2.


[58] M. Skilton, Building the Digital Enterprise, Palgrave Macmillan, UK, London,
2015, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/9781137477729.


[59] N. Sanders, Big Data Driven Supply Chain Management: A Framework for
Implementing Analytics and Turning Information Into Intelligence,
Northeastern University, 2014. http://books.google.com.au/books?
hl=de&lr=&id=-b2LAwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR6&dq=customer+driven
+supply+chain&ots=RNP3I_URAY&sig=GO6InXDjMpl95Upqa-_Rqvmz-cQ.


[60] A. Uhl, L.A. Gollenia, Digital enterprise transformation: a business-Driven
approach to leveraging innovative IT, in: A. Uhl, L.A. Gollenia (Eds.), Digit.
Enterp. Transform. A Business-Driven Approach to Leveraging Innov. IT,
Ashgate Publishin, Ltd., 2014, pp. 1–306.


[61] A. Uhl, L.A. Gollenia, Digital Enterprise Transformation: A Business-Driven
Approach to Leveraging Innovative IT, Routledge, 2016.


[62] Y. Wang, E-logistics: Managing Your Digital Supply Chains for Competitive
Advantage, Kogan Page, 2016.


[63] G. Oswald, M. Kleinemeie (Eds.), Shaping the Digital Enterprise, Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2017, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-40967-2.


[64] IBM, The Smarter Supply Chain of the Future, 2009.
[65] M. Raab, B. Griffin-Cryan, Digital Transformation of Supply Chains: Creating


Value–When Digital Meets Physical, (2011) .
[66] S. Raj, A. Sharma, Supply Chain Management in the Cloud, (2014) . https://


www.accenture.com/tr-en/insight-supply-chain-management-cloud.
[67] L. Cecere, Digital Supply Chain Insights on Driving the Digital Supply Chain


Transformation, (2014) .
[68] L. Cecere, Embracing the Digital Supply Chain, Supply Chain Shaman, (2016)


February, http://www.supplychainshaman.com/demand/demanddriven/
embracing-the-digital-supply-chain/. (Accessed 15 October 2016)..


[69] B. Schmidt, C.M. Wallenburg, S. Rutkowsky, L. Einmahl, I. Petersen, F. Klötzke,
Digital Supply Chains: Increasingly Critical for Competitive Edge, (2015) .


[70] J. Kinnet, Creating a Digital Supply Chain: Monsanto’s Journey, SlideShare,
2015, pp. 1–16 http://www.slideshare.net/BCTIM/creating-a-digital-supply-
chain-monsantos-journey. (Accessed 28 April 2016).


[71] The Digital Supply Chain Initiative, Digital Supply Chains: A Frontsite Flip,
Sanya, China, 2015.


[72] P. Guarraia, G. Gerstenhaber, M. Athanassiou, P.-H. Boutot, The Intangible
Benefits of a Digital Supply Chain, (2015) .


[73] E. Rakowski, TechTrends 2016, Part II: The Supply Chain Goes Digital, (2015) .


[74] Cerasis, The future of supply chain, logistics & manufacturing: How
technology is transforming, 2015. http://cerasis.com/.


[75] Cerasis, Why Supply Chain Leaders Are Using Big Data Analytics, 2015. http://
www.industryweek.com/supply-chain-big-data.


[76] EY, Digital supply chain: it’s all about that data, 2016.
[77] A. Ganeriwalla, G. Walter, L. Kotlik, R. Roesgen, S. Gstettner, Three Paths to


Advantage with Digital Supply Chains, (2016) .
[78] CapGemini, Infor, GTNexus, The Current and Future State of Digital Supply


Chain Transformation, 2016. http://www.gtnexus.com/resources/papers-
and-reports/current-and-future-state-digital-supply-chain-transformation.


[79] GTnexus, The Internet of Things Supply Chain, GT NEXUS. (2016) 1–6.
[80] DHL Customer Solutions & Innovation, Fair and Responsible Logistics. A DHL


perspective on how to create lasting competitive advantage, (2015) 1–40.
http://www.dhl.com/en/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/
fair.html.


[81] D. Kraemer, Omni-Channel Logistics A DHL perspective on implications, DHL
Cust. Solut. Innov. (2015)


[82] M. Jeske, M. Grüner, F. WeiB, Big Data in Logistics, (2013) .
[83] J. Macaulay, L. Buckalew, G. Chung, Internet of Things in Logistics, DHL Cust.


Solut. Innov., (2015) , pp. 1–27.
[84] M. Heutger, M. Kuckelhaus, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in Logistics, (2014) .
[85] T. Bonkenburg, Robotics in logistics, (2016) .
[86] K. Richter, O. Poenicke, Low-Cost Sensor Technology, (2013) .
[87] DHL Trend Research, Self-Driving Vehicles in Logistics, DHL Cust. Solut. Innov.


(2014). http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/
logistics_insights/dhl_self_driving_vehicles.pdf.


[88] H. Glockner, K. Jannek, J. Mahn, B. Theis, Augmented Reality, DHL Cust. Solut.
Innov., (2014), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2656433.


[89] DHL Trend Research, Key Logistics Trends in Life Sciences 2020 +, 2013.
[90] N. Bubner, P. Bodenbenner, J. Noronha, Logistics Trend Radar, (2016) .
[91] M. Kuckelhaus, P.M. Yee, 3D Printing and the Future of Supply Chains, (2016) .


http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/
logistics_insights/dhl_trendreport_3dprinting.pdf.


[92] G. Nowak, J. Maluck, C. Sturmer, J. Pasemann, The Era of Digitized Trucking:
Transforming the Logistics Value Chain, (2016) .


[93] E. Alvarez, S. Pillsbury, M. Strom, M. Kinder, Connect and Optimize. The New
World of Digital Operations, (2016) .


[94] S. Schrauf, P. Berttram, Industry 4.0: How Digitization Makes the Supply
Chain More Efficient, Agile, and Customer-focused, Strategy, (2016) . http://
www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/industry4.0.


[95] R. Geissbauer, R. Weissbarth, J. Wetzstein, Procurement 4.0: Are you ready for
the digital revolution? (2016) .


[96] B. Brown, J. Sikes, P. Willmott, Bullish on Digital: McKinsey Global Survey
Results, Insights Publ., 2013 August, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/bullish-on-digital-mckinsey-
global-survey-results. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


[97] M. Rouse, Digital Supply Chain, Search Manufacturing ERP.com, (2016) 30
March, http://searchmanufacturingerp.techtarget.com/definition/digital-
supply-chain?vgnextfmt=print. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


[98] G. Hanifan, A. Sharma, C. Newberry, The Digital Supply Network: A new
paradigm for supply chain management, (2014) .


[99] J. Bechtold, A. Kern, C. Lauenstein, L. Bernhofer, Industry 4.0 – The Capgemini
Consulting View: Sharpening the Picture beyond the Hype, (2014) .


[100] K. Cukier, Big data and the future of business, in: Turner (Ed.), Reinventing Co.
Digit. Age, BBVA, 2015, 2018, pp. 37–51.


[101] M. Heutger, M. Kuckelhaus, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in Logistics, (2014) .
[102] T. Hines, Supply chain strategies: customer-driven and customer-focused,


(2004) .
[103] P.L. Carter, Robert M. Monczka, Gary L. Ragatz, Supply Chain Integration:


Challenges and Good Practices, (2009) .
[104] R.G. Richey, T.R. Morgan, K. Lindsey-Hall, F.G. Adams, A global exploration of


big data in the supply chain, Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 46 (2016), doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-05-2016-0134.


[105] D.H. Nabben, 12 Trends that are shaping the future of logistics, Digit. Supply
Chain, (2016) http://www.supplychaindigital.com/logistics/3610/12-
Trends-that-are-Shaping-the-Future-of-Logistics. (Accessed 4 September
2016).


[106] Accenture, Big data analytics in supply chain: hype or here to stay? Accent
Glob. Oper. Megatrend Study (2014) 1–20.


[107] Strategy&, Digital strategy and capabilities to win in a digitized world,
Strategy&. (2016). http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/what-we-
think/digitization/digital-strategy-capabilities. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


[108] Q. Corver, G. Elkhuizen, A framework for digital business transformation,
Cognizant (2014) 1–10. https://www.cognizant.com/InsightsWhitepapers/a-
framework-for-digital-business-transformation-codex-1048.pdf.


[109] K.J. Cohen, R.M. Cyert, Strategy: formulation, implementation, and
monitoring, J. Bus. 46 (1973) 349–367.


[110] A.K. Srivastava, Modeling strategic performance factors for effective strategy
execution, Int. J. Product. Perform. Manag. 62 (2013) 554–582, doi:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-11-2012-0121.


[111] J. Pradabwong, C. Braziotis, J.D.T. Tannock, K.S. Pawar, Business process
management and supply chain collaboration: effects on performance and
competitiveness, Supply Chain Manag. An Int. J. 22 (2017) 107–121, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/SCM-01-2017-0008.


[112] A. Harshak, B. Schmaus, D. Dimitrova, Building a digital culture: How to Meet
the Challenge of multichannel digitization, (2013) .


176 G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0195

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEEM.2014.7058772

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0200

http://www.scientific.net/AMR.926-930.4118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0210

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IAdCC.2013.6514473

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0220

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.11.010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0230

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.019

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0245

http://www.uni-kassel.de/upress/online/OpenAccess/978-3-86219-926-6.OpenAccess.pdf

http://www.uni-kassel.de/upress/online/OpenAccess/978-3-86219-926-6.OpenAccess.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0285

http://dx.doi.org/10.2991/978-94-6239-094-2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0290

http://books.google.com.au/books?hl=de%26lr=%26id=-b2LAwAAQBAJ%26oi=fnd%26pg=PR6%26dq=customer+driven+supply+chain%26ots=RNP3I_URAY%26sig=GO6InXDjMpl95Upqa-_Rqvmz-cQ

http://books.google.com.au/books?hl=de%26lr=%26id=-b2LAwAAQBAJ%26oi=fnd%26pg=PR6%26dq=customer+driven+supply+chain%26ots=RNP3I_URAY%26sig=GO6InXDjMpl95Upqa-_Rqvmz-cQ

http://books.google.com.au/books?hl=de%26lr=%26id=-b2LAwAAQBAJ%26oi=fnd%26pg=PR6%26dq=customer+driven+supply+chain%26ots=RNP3I_URAY%26sig=GO6InXDjMpl95Upqa-_Rqvmz-cQ

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0315

http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40967-2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0325

https://www.accenture.com/tr-en/insight-supply-chain-management-cloud

https://www.accenture.com/tr-en/insight-supply-chain-management-cloud

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0335

http://www.supplychainshaman.com/demand/demanddriven/embracing-the-digital-supply-chain/

http://www.supplychainshaman.com/demand/demanddriven/embracing-the-digital-supply-chain/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0345

http://www.slideshare.net/BCTIM/creating-a-digital-supply-chain-monsantos-journey

http://www.slideshare.net/BCTIM/creating-a-digital-supply-chain-monsantos-journey

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0365

http://cerasis.com/

http://www.industryweek.com/supply-chain-big-data

http://www.industryweek.com/supply-chain-big-data

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0385

http://www.gtnexus.com/resources/papers-and-reports/current-and-future-state-digital-supply-chain-transformation

http://www.gtnexus.com/resources/papers-and-reports/current-and-future-state-digital-supply-chain-transformation

http://www.dhl.com/en/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/fair.html

http://www.dhl.com/en/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/fair.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0430

http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_self_driving_vehicles.pdf

http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_self_driving_vehicles.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0450

http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trendreport_3dprinting.pdf

http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trendreport_3dprinting.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0465

http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/industry4.0

http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/industry4.0

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0475

http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/bullish-on-digital-mckinsey-global-survey-results

http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/bullish-on-digital-mckinsey-global-survey-results

http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/bullish-on-digital-mckinsey-global-survey-results

http://searchmanufacturingerp.techtarget.com/definition/digital-supply-chain?vgnextfmt=print

http://searchmanufacturingerp.techtarget.com/definition/digital-supply-chain?vgnextfmt=print

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0520

http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-05-2016-0134

http://www.supplychaindigital.com/logistics/3610/12-Trends-that-are-Shaping-the-Future-of-Logistics

http://www.supplychaindigital.com/logistics/3610/12-Trends-that-are-Shaping-the-Future-of-Logistics

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0530

http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/what-we-think/digitization/digital-strategy-capabilities

http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/what-we-think/digitization/digital-strategy-capabilities

https://www.cognizant.com/InsightsWhitepapers/a-framework-for-digital-business-transformation-codex-1048.pdf

https://www.cognizant.com/InsightsWhitepapers/a-framework-for-digital-business-transformation-codex-1048.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0550

http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-11-2012-0121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0555

http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/SCM-01-2017-0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0560




[113] Anastasia, Digital Transformation: What, Why And How, Business, Strateg.
Technol. May 1 (2015). https://www.cleverism.com/digital-transformation-
what-why-how/. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


[114] Nurun, Digital Product & Services, Nurun Website. (2016). http://www.
nurun.com/en/what-we-do/digital-products-services/. (Accessed 15 October
2016).


[115] J.T. Yee, S.C. Oh, Background and introduction, Technol. Integr. to Bus,
Springer, London, London, 2013, pp. 1–22, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4471-4390-1_1.


[116] P. Daugherty, No TitleBlending humans and technology in the workforce,
Computerweekly.com. (2015) June. http://www.computerweekly.com/
opinion/Blending-humans-and-technology-in-the-workforce. (Accessed 15
October 2016).


[117] J. Oyekan, V. Prabhu, A. Tiwari, V. Baskaran, M. Burgess, R. Mcnally, Remote
real-time collaboration through synchronous exchange of digitised human–
workpiece interactions, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 67 (2017) 83–93, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2016.08.012.


[118] A. Najmi, H. Shakouri, G.S. Nazari, An integrated supply chain: a large scale
complementarity model for the biofuel markets, Biomass Bioenergy 86
(2016) 88–104, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2016.01.010.


[119] B. Klievink, Understanding public-private collaboration configurations for
international information infrastructures, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci, Springer,
Cham, 2015, pp. 170–180, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22479-4_13.


[120] M. Townsend, Priorities for building organizational infrastructure, Mass High
Tech. J. New Engl. Technol. 24 (2006) 9740.


[121] E.O. Ibem, S. Laryea, Survey of digital technologies in procurement of
construction projects, Autom. Constr. 46 (2014) 11–21, doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.autcon.2014.07.003.


[122] F. Sahin, E.P. Robinson, Flow coordination and information sharing in supply
chains: review, implications, and directions for future research, Decis. Sci. 33
(2002) 505–536, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5915.2002.tb01654. x.


[123] F. Sahin, E.P.J. Robinson, Information sharing and coordination in make-to-
order supply chains, J. Oper. Manag. 23 (2005) 579–598, doi:http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.007.


[124] P.K. Bagchi, B. Chun Ha, T. Skjoett-Larsen, L. Boege Soerensen, Supply chain
integration: a European survey, Int. J. Logist. Manag. 16 (2005) 275–294, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09574090510634557.


[125] R. Alfalla-Luque, C. Medina-Lopez, P.K. Dey, Supply chain integration
framework using literature review, Prod. Plan. Control. 24 (2013) 800–817,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2012.666870.


[126] H.L. Lee, Creating value through supply chain integration, Supply Chain
Manag. Rev. 4 (4) (2000) 30–36.


[127] R. Barratt, How automation is changing the supply chain, Supply Demand
Chain Exec. (2016) https://www.sdcexec.com/warehousing/article/
12267524/how-automation-is-changing-the-supply-chain (accessed
October 15, 2016).


[128] O.W. Lemoine, T. Skjoett-Larsen, Reconfiguration of supply chains and
implications for transport, Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 34 (2004) 793–
810, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09600030410571365.


[129] S.C. Counsil, SCOR Model, Supply Chain Oper. Ref. Model. (2004). http://
www.supply-chain.org.


[130] Z.D. Turhan, O. Vayvay, S. Birgun, Supply chain reengineering in a paint
company using axiomatic design, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 57 (2011) 421–
435, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00170-011-3296-4.


[131] S.F. DeAngelis, Digital enterprises rely on digital supply chains, Enterra Solut.
(August) (2015) http://www.enterrasolutions.com/2015/08/digital-
enterprises-rely-on-digital-supply-chains.html. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


[132] J. Bradach, T.J. Tierney, N. Stone, Delivering on the promise of Digital
Transformation, Harv. Bus. Rev. 27 (2014) 275–284.


[133] A.E. Consultancy, What Is Digital Transformation, (2015) http://www.
theagileelephant.com/what-is-digital-transformation/. (Accessed 15
October 2016).


[134] N. Tepper, Companies want digital supply chains, but many are slow to act,
(2016) b2becommerceworld.com. April 12. https://www.
b2becommerceworld.com/2016/04/12/companies-want-digital-supply-
chains-many-are-slow-act. (Accessed 15 October 2016).


G. Büyüközkan, F. Göçer / Computers in Industry 97 (2018) 157–177 177



https://www.cleverism.com/digital-transformation-what-why-how/

https://www.cleverism.com/digital-transformation-what-why-how/

http://www.nurun.com/en/what-we-do/digital-products-services/

http://www.nurun.com/en/what-we-do/digital-products-services/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0575

http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4390-1_1

http://www.computerweekly.com/opinion/Blending-humans-and-technology-in-the-workforce

http://www.computerweekly.com/opinion/Blending-humans-and-technology-in-the-workforce

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0585

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2016.08.012

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0605

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2014.07.003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0615

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0620

http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09574090510634557

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0630

https://www.sdcexec.com/warehousing/article/12267524/how-automation-is-changing-the-supply-chain

https://www.sdcexec.com/warehousing/article/12267524/how-automation-is-changing-the-supply-chain

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0640

http://www.supply-chain.org

http://www.supply-chain.org

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0650

http://www.enterrasolutions.com/2015/08/digital-enterprises-rely-on-digital-supply-chains.html

http://www.enterrasolutions.com/2015/08/digital-enterprises-rely-on-digital-supply-chains.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30448-7/sbref0660

http://www.theagileelephant.com/what-is-digital-transformation/

http://www.theagileelephant.com/what-is-digital-transformation/

https://www.b2becommerceworld.com/2016/04/12/companies-want-digital-supply-chains-many-are-slow-act

https://www.b2becommerceworld.com/2016/04/12/companies-want-digital-supply-chains-many-are-slow-act

https://www.b2becommerceworld.com/2016/04/12/companies-want-digital-supply-chains-many-are-slow-act


