









FEATURE a digitaLLy disrUPtive sUPPLy Chain


6   DMI Vol.26, Issue 4


It’s inevitable—the traditional supply chain will eventually 
meet the digital frontier. Imagine today’s new community  
of makers sourcing designers to refine their inventions,  
and 3D printers to generate first-round prototypes.  
What will this brave new world look like?


By Jacklyn ady


A
Digitally 
Disruptive
Supply 
Chain






DMI Vol.26, Issue 4   7


FEATURE a digitaLLy disrUPtive sUPPLy Chain


n EFFECTIVE SUPPLy ChAIn IS A 
demanding beast—you must be sure to grease all 
the parts of the machine and continue to maintain 
and update best practices. Like a new romantic 
interest, it takes a while to figure out. You will 
make some mistakes along the way, and the minute 
you stop paying it attention, you will experience 
problems, and it may cost you resources, time, and 
energy to get back on the right track.


In some ways, supply chain management is 
still in its infancy. Only formally recognized in 
the mid-1900s mainstream, it’s still forming an 
identity. I believe the next wave will look more 
like an online hacker space and less like a busy, 
face-to-face interaction.


With the advent of new, socially driven 
communication avenues—applications such as 
Skype—I see the supply chain moving into the 
digital frontier full-force. That will disrupt the 
traditional supply chain and its more conservative 
platforms. I see that new supply chain moving 
online, with 24/7 access for absolutely everyone. 
Not just the big corporations with deep pockets, 
but the little guys—the inventors, the mom-and-
pop shops, the makers, and so on. It will run on a 
live schedule, and it will be flexible and adaptable 
in the face of market conditions, material 
shortages, emerging technology, and product 
design trends. And much of it will be driven by 
the “maker” movement. 


In the international business world, there are 
many companies that function on a full 24-hour, 
world-clock workday. When I arrive at work in the 
morning, the first thing I do is check my emails 


from our overseas contacts. Depending on the 
project, my days are filled with communicating 
with those contacts. At the same time, I must be 
sure to hash out ideas and sourcing issues with 
my home team in the States to be sure that my 
optimistic design efforts have a logistical leg to 
stand on. It can be frustrating and frightening; 
it’s essentially a venture into uncharted territory 
when one is developing new products. It can be 
especially daunting when you’re working on new 
technologies and processes. Sometimes, just 
sourcing components can kill an idea or concept. 
Other times, logistics in shipping and freight 
policies will halt a project, and compromises will 
have to be made.


My biggest barriers involve sourcing the 
correct materials in a suitable time frame. 
Wouldn’t it be great if there were one worldwide 
sourcing system I could log into, where I could 
choose sourcing based on my special needs and 
wants versus who I know, with whom I currently 
work, or for whom I currently work? Think of the 
opportunities for midsize and smaller companies, 
or short-run product design—there could be a 
much better chance of product success rates if we 
weren’t forced into the same traditional tight box 
that often suffocates and murders hundreds of 
thousands of new design ideas every year.


Innovation and new product design can 
be such an exciting and invigorating creative 
challenge. But working through suitable supply 
chains is like navigating a city in heels.


Enter the makers
There is no doubt that the maker movement is a lot 
more than a hobby. It’s a New Age revolution. It’s a 
living, breathing movement that’s creating jobs and 
revenue in local economies all across the country.


The maker movement has grown in part 
because of greater access to resources such as 3D 


A






8   DMI Vol.26, Issue 4


FEATURE a digitaLLy disrUPtive sUPPLy Chain


printers, laser cutters, computer-aided design 
programs, and open-source hardware. What if 
those makers could source designers to refine 
their inventions, and 3D printers to generate 
first-round prototypes? What if they could 
instantaneously source the correct materials 
from around the world through sustainable 
manufacturers, which could then immediately 
distribute through a variety of wholesale 
or retailer locations, cutting time spent in 
warehouses and reducing transit time? The data 
provided on this digital interface could easily 
order and reorder based on current inventory, 
or possibly predict future waves of consumer 
needs based on previous market climates. Excess 
inventory could be a problem of the past. ROI 
could become a lean, mean machine as the cost of 
investment goes down.


We are already beginning to see the 
transformation that 3D printing can bring to the 
table. As that technology gets cheaper, faster, 
and better, we will see it become a big part of the 
supply chain in one form or another.


Some concepts, I believe, will be transformed 
with a digital platform. We’ll be able to detail 
best practices and strategies, tools, and processes 
on an online system with clear expectations. 
We’ll be able to set realistic goals. We’ll be able 
to construct and execute evaluations for supplier 
performance and rate them in the same way we 
rate our favorite places to eat.


Performance data could be automatically 
measured and reported live in terms we can all 
understand, and we could use that data as leverage 
to help suppliers improve and push effectiveness 
in our own organizations.


Supplier reviews will become as simple 
as online reviews—shared worldwide across 
different marketplaces and areas of business like 
a giant customer review board. Best practices will 
become an evolving system of rules that changes 
with companies and inventors in real time. 
Efficiency and satisfaction will improve with the 
creation of a competitive atmosphere where best 
practices prevail.


Some questions to be answered
This new digital supply-chain frontier will 
involve new barriers and risks. What kinds 
of software and applications will it require? 
What interface will work best? Will the same 
platforms be accessible for large corporations 
and small companies? What kind of security will 
be required? What kinds of legal battles will we 
encounter in terms of, for instance, open sourcing 
and intellectual property? How will we train the 
next generation to work on this digital interface?


Perhaps this digital supply chain could be as 
easily accessible as crowd-funding services. What 
if the two could combine forces and offer not only 
funding but also complete projects, from sourcing 
to delivery, all in one easy-to-access system? 
Design to delivery.


Manufacturing organizations are beginning 
to form, and they will be looking for easier ways 
to access information. IMCP (the Investing in 
Manufacturing Communities Partnership) was 
formed under the Obama Administration and 
may or may not survive into the next presidential 
term. But these types of communities are already 
combining forces, sharing best practices, and 
networking to become stronger. They may change, 
but they are not going to dissolve overnight. 


As suppliers and manufacturers look to expand 
their core competencies, I believe they will want to 
reach out for new and profitable business. If they 
cannot find it in their current client base, they will 
eventually search elsewhere to grow.


I’m not naive enough to think a value-driven 
digital supply chain is a perfect utopia, but I do 
believe it will surface in one form or another 
because of emerging trends and technologies, 
the maker movement, and ever-changing market 
conditions. 


Jacklyn Ady (née Woniger) is 
a graduate of the University of 
Cincinnati College of Design, 
Architecture, Art, and Planning 
(DAAP) and holds a BS degree in 
industrial design with a business 
minor and specific concentration 
in marketing. Ady is currently 
working as an industrial designer 
for Escalade Sports, located in 
Evansville, Indiana, and has 


collected several design patents 
while working on the engineering 
team. Ady has worked in many 
areas of design, including 
children’s toys, architecture, 
and design research. She has a 
passion for sports and believes 
that design thinking is truly the 
next competitive advantage for 
companies big and small.




