









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Technological Forecasting & Social Change
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore


Multistage implementation framework for smart supply chain management
under industry 4.0
Xue-Feng Shaoa, Wei Liua,⁎, Yi Lia, Hassan Rauf Chaudhryb, Xiao-Guang Yuec
a Discipline of International Business, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
b Suleman Dawood School of Business, Lahore University of Management Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan
c Department of Computer Science and Engineering, School of Sciences, European University Cyprus, Nicosia 1516, Cyprus


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Industry 4.0
Smart factories
Smart supply chain management


A B S T R A C T


The true potential of the industry 4.0, which is a byproduct of the fourth industrial revolution, cannot be actually
realized. This is, of course true, until the smart factories in the supply chains get connected to each other, with
their systems and the machines linked to a common networking system. The last few years have experienced an
increase in the adoption and acceptance of the industry 4.0′s components. However, the next stage of smart
factories, which will be the smart supply chains, is still in its period of infancy. Moreover, there is a simultaneous
need to maintain a focus on the supply chain level implementation of the concept that industry 4.0 puts forth.
This is important in order to gain the end to end benefits, while also avoiding the organization to organization
compatibility issues that may follow later on. When considering this concept, limited research exists on the
issues related to the implementation of industry 4.0, at the supply chain level. Hence, keeping in mind this lack
of literature and research available, on a phenomenon that will define the future of business and industry, this
study uses an exploratory approach to capture the implementation of industry 4.0 concepts across multiple tiers
of the supply chain. Based on this research, the study proposes a multistage implementation framework that
highlights the organizational enablers such as culture, cross-functional approach, and the continuous im-
provement activities. Furthermore, it also highlights the staged implementation of the advanced tools, starting
from the focal organization with the subsequent integration with the partner organizations.


1. Introduction


One word that transcends most of the consumers, as well as the
manufacturing topics being researched these days, is “digitization”.
With the advent of the Covid-19 virus, that has taken over the world as
one of the most devastating pandemics, all major industries, from
education to manufacturing, are exploring novel ways to digitize their
operations. Technology is now being seen as a robust strategic weapon
(Chavarrìa-Barrientos et al., 2018) that is expected to ensure opera-
tional performance and continuity, through process integration
(Srinivasan and Swink, 2015), by creating smart factories (Rashid and
Tjahjono, 2016). This situation has given a much needed thrust to the
adoption and implementation of smart technologies in various aspects
of trade, business and organizational management. What started as a
concept in Germany under the industry 4.0 revolution, by using smart
ICT technologies, is now being acknowledged by all the segments of the
society. Moreover, it is looking for ways to transform into this new


environment in the most seamless and successful manner.
Industry 4.0, or smart manufacturing, are the terms that are being


used for digital transformation, using technologies such as the Internet
of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Cloud Computing (CC),
Machine Learning (ML), and Data Analytics (DA), etc. These concepts
have been built upon the interconnectedness of the machines and sys-
tems that are using the above-mentioned technologies, to self-correct
and self-adopt according to environmental needs of time
(Fatorachian and Kazemi 2020). Another term that is being used is of
that of resilient systems that are capable of self-correction. Smart
manufacturing signifies the working atmosphere, in which employees,
machinery, enterprise systems, and devices are linked with other cyber-
physical systems, as well as the internetwork (Öberg and
Graham, 2016). The amount of data being generated by the industrial
production systems has seen, and is also expected to experience, im-
mense growth. Moreover, the increase in the computational power is
now leading organizations to make more informed decisions. The use of


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120354
Received 10 May 2020; Received in revised form 21 September 2020; Accepted 23 September 2020


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: xuefeng.shao@sydney.edu.au (X.-F. Shao), wei.liu2@sydney.edu.au (W. Liu), yi.li2@sydney.edu.au (Y. Li),


hassan.rauf@lums.edu.pk (H.R. Chaudhry), x.yue@external.euc.ac.cy (X.-G. Yue).



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00401625

















https://www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120354

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120354

mailto:xuefeng.shao@sydney.edu.au

mailto:wei.liu2@sydney.edu.au

mailto:yi.li2@sydney.edu.au

mailto:hassan.rauf@lums.edu.pk

mailto:x.yue@external.euc.ac.cy

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120354

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120354&domain=pdf




these technologies can be leveraged in order to integrate the data that is
being generated, to make smarter and more calculated decisions. This
fourth industrial revolution has brought about a new environment for
industrial management and smart process management (Moeuf et al.,
2018).


The concept of smart manufacturing is evolving from simple digi-
tization and automation of individual machines, to connecting ma-
chines using IoT technologies and utilizing the data from the connected
systems to make decisions on the go. Lean manufacturing, that focuses
on improving the service that is provided to the customers, and redu-
cing process waste (Womack and Jones 2003) is considered as one of
the most widely adopted process management systems (Tortorella et al.,
2017). However, implementing organizations have been able to reap
benefits only when the internal improvement efforts were linked with
the external stake holders, i.e. suppliers and the customers
(Frohlick and Westbrook, 2001). Similar to the lean implementation
across supply chains, digitalization of processes is obligatory for the
supply chains, especially if they seek to reap the benefits in true terms
(Pereira and Romero, 2017).


The extant literature available on the dynamics of industry 4.0 fo-
cuses more on the application of various technologies such as the IoT,
AI, ML, and data analytics from a manufacturing standpoint. However,
very limited research, particularly about the supply chain interaction of
advanced technologies, exists in the literature (Müller and Voigt, 2018).
Within the supply chain literature that has been written regarding the
concept of industry 4.0, or smart manufacturing, the majority of the
studies have been focused on the theoretical or conceptual models of
implementation. Very few studies, however, capture the empirical
perspective that pertains to this phenomenon (Buyukuzkan and Gocer
2018). Since the industry 4.0 concept along the supply chain is still at in
its stages of infancy, within the supply chain literature, this exploratory
study captures the stage-wise implementation of this concept across a
multi-tiered supply chain.


The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 re-
presents the literature and the background of this research. Ad-
ditionally, Section 2 has been further subdivided into smart manu-
facturing, components of smart manufacturing, and its application
across supply chains. Moving on, Section 3 discusses the research
methodology. Whereas, Section 4 captures the case data of industry 4.0
application, along with a three-tiered supply chain. Moving on,
Section 5 presents the results of the exploratory study, and also pro-
poses a framework of the industry 4.0 implementation across supply
chains, while the last section looks at the contributions of this study,
along with its limitations.


2. Literature review


2.1. Smart manufacturing


When it comes to analyzing the literature that has been written, it
has been observed that different terms have been used interchangeably.
These include, for instance, data driven or smart manufacturing, in-
dustry 4.0 technology, advanced manufacturing, factories of the future,
and the fourth industrial revolution - all representing similar concepts
(Buchi, Cugno, Castagnoli 2020). That is to say that all these terms are
talking about the future of manufacturing, by utilizing the idea of
connected and networked technologies, that will generate value for the
organizations, as well as the society (Roblek et al., 2016). The broader
concept here refers to the machines that are equipped with data cap-
turing devices. These devices are designed so that they can commu-
nicate with other machines and systems, in order to fulfill certain
predetermined objectives (Tang et al., 2016). The research carried out
during the recent years has seen much emphasis on the advent of smart
manufacturing. The integration and interoperability (Chen et al., 2008;
Lu 2017), helps bridge the gap, and hence, create a connection between
the physical and cyber world. This integration then creates the


connections between the external entities. In this context, enterprise
integration can take place at multiple levels, i.e., physical, application
and business level. Physical integration refers to the connection of
physical devices and machines, whereas, application integration refers
to the connectivity or integration of the software or database systems.
Business integration involves the coordination among the business
processes, which helps every aspect of the business to “gel in” together,
so as to ensure the smooth transition of the work procedures
(Chen et al., 2008). Also, interoperability creates the connections in the
systems, in order to exchange knowledge and skills. It is defined as the
ability of two separate systems to understand each other, and operate in
other environments (Chen et al., 2008). That is to say that, in terms of
the machines, it is considered to be the ability to access another ma-
chine's resources. Whereas, in a networked environment, it is the in-
teraction between the various systems of the enterprise (Chen et al.,
2008). The Initial research streams focused more on the component
level application of this concept, which merely focuses on the in-
dividual technologies, such as the cloud services, big data, etc., (which
will be discussed in the next section which refers to the enabling
technologies). Whereas, some of the more recent papers have explored
the integrative aspects of these technologies, such as the design, plan-
ning, manufacturing, human resource management, etc.
(Osterrieder et al., 2020). The purpose of smart manufacturing is to
utilize the data from the product lifecycle, into the intelligence systems,
which improve the positive aspects of all the manufacturing processes
(O'Donovan et al., 2015).


Frank et al. (2019) dissected and classified the concept of industry
4.0 into two main components. These included the front-end and the
base technologies. The front-end technology dimension includes smart
working, smart products, smart supply chain, and smart manufacturing
initiatives. Whereas, the base technology elements include cloud ser-
vices, the internet of things, big data, and analytics. Following in the
same context, Wang et al. (2016) hypothesized that there are layers of
activities taking place in the manufacturing environments. The physical
layer consists of the shop floor, machines, and all the tangible activities
taking place there. Whereas, the data layer consists of transferring the
data captured from the physical layer, i.e., by using the sensors and
other technologies, on to the cloud environment. The intelligence layer
consists of the software and tools (analytical, prescriptive, etc.) that are
needed to carry out the analysis, while the final layer comprises of the
control layer forming the human supervision. According to
Tao et al. (2018), the data driven smart manufacturing comprises of
four modules. These include the real-time monitoring, problem pro-
cessing data driver, and the manufacturing module. While the big data
enables the companies to become more competitive, through intelligent
tracking systems, and material assessment, energy efficiency manage-
ment, and predictive maintenance.


Moving further, smart factories have the ability make timely deci-
sions, with less human connection, which is managed via artificial in-
telligence (Wuest et al., 2016). Smart manufacturing can perform tasks
such as the all-round monitoring, optimization of the manufacturing
activities, and simulation through big data (Tao et al., 2018). Moreover,
smart manufacturing utilizes the data that is extracted from the busi-
ness processes, and in order to refine them further, it tends to improve
the process efficiencies and the product performance. The first stage of
this process is the collection of the data from the manufacturing en-
vironment. This includes the data on the inputs, i.e., the raw material
characteristics, the data on the manufacturing variables, the data on the
machine and human variables, and finally, the data on the output
characteristics. The next step for smart manufacturing is to analyze the
data that is stored at the cloud based data centers. This forms the core
action point for the other subsequent activities, such as the monitoring
and problem solving initiatives. In this regard, the monitoring stage acts
as a quality controller, with any changes in process parameters re-
sulting in the process readjustment. While the last stage, i.e., the pro-
blem processing, uses the data to predict emerging problems and the


X.-F. Shao, et al.






























possible solutions that can be suggested in this regard (Tao et al., 2018).
Buchi et al. (2020) have indicated towards the increased production
flexibility, improved performance, decrease in errors, higher effi-
ciencies, and reduced set-up times due to the smart manufacturing in-
itiatives. Moreover, Buchi and Castagnoli (2018) have pointed towards
an increased efficiency factor, and a greater production capacity, as a
result of smart adoption. Additionally, Tao et al. (2018) have further
highlighted the characteristics of the data that is driven by smart
manufacturing, which includes product development, self-organization
(production planning), smart execution (raw material movement, pro-
cessing), self-regulation and the self-learning within a system. Going
deeper into the same context, it is observed that the product develop-
ment, or the design uses rich consumer data (behavioral data, user-
product interaction data), in order to identify the key product features
and requirements. The manufacturing planning can be further en-
hanced, by using the data for the optimum resource allocation, and
network optimization. Similarly, the machine data can also be used to
predict any probable equipment faults, along with the diagnoses which
will eventually lead to the proactive maintenance (Tao et al., 2018).
Van Lopik et al. (2020) found that capabilities pertaining to augmented
reality tend to enable the end-user, so that they can minimize the dis-
ruption to the workflow of the particular shop floor. Additionally,
Oliff and Liu (2017) showed how data mining techniques could lead to
an improvement of the production operations, in terms of the quality in
small manufacturing organizations. Also, the internet of things helps to
reduce the cost, improve quality, efficiency, and the predictive main-
tenance services (Aheleroff et al., 2020).


2.2. Enabling technologies


Many researchers have explained the phenomena of smart manu-
facturing, or industry 4.0 technologies, in terms of an augmented and
virtual reality (Wu et al., 2013; Rüßmann et al., 2015; Kolberg and
Zühlke, 2015), additive manufacturing (Huang et al., 2013; Chan et al.,
2018), internet of things (Wu et al., 2017), big data analytics (De Mauro
et al., 2015; Addo-Tenkorang and Helo, 2016; Lenz et al.,2018), and
cyber-physical systems (Monostori, 2014; Lee et al., 2015; Zhong and
Nof, 2015). Wu et al. (2013) have cited Azuma, (1997), in order to
explain virtual reality as something which offers real time interactions,
and three dimensional depiction of the objects in question. Additive
manufacturing is a production technique, where the products are
manufactured in a layer by layer manner, by using digital data, and
special polymeric materials (Wu et al., 2013). Moreover, the Internet of
Things (IoT) is a technology that lets autonomous objects and devices to
be sensed or controlled remotely (Wu et al., 2017; Ketzenberg and
Meters, 2020). Also, big data refers to the enhanced decision making
capabilities, due to the collection and analysis of large data sets
(Astill et al., 2020). Cloud computing is defined as the ability to access
the data storage, and analyzing (computing) the relevant resources via
the internet, while the resources are maintained by a third party
(Zhong and Nof, 2015). In the same context,Adkil et al. (2018) high-
lighted the key technologies in industry 4.0, such as the (a) adaptive
robotics, (b) data analytics and artificial intelligence, (c) simulation (d),
embedded systems (e), communication and networking (f), cyberse-
curity (g), cloud (h), additive manufacturing (i), virtualization tech-
nologies (j), sensors and actuators (k), RFID and RTLS technologies, and
finally, the (l) mobile technologies. Chiarello et al. (2018) explained the
fourth industrial revolution in the form of enabling technologies. These
included concepts such as 3D printing, augmented reality, additive
manufacturing and virtual reality, digital transaction, big data, com-
puting, programming languages, internet of things, protocols and ar-
chitecture, communication networks and infrastructures, production
and identification, including constituent technologies. Moreover, they
also described them as well for the common knowledge about the in-
dustry 4.0 technologies. Furthermore, Osterrieder et al., 2020 have
highlighted that the key eight perspectives, which primarily include


cyber physical systems, IT infrastructure, human machine interaction,
cloud manufacturing and services, decision making, and data handling,
are considered to be vital elements in smart manufacturing. According
to Pacchini et al. (2019), eight enablers, such as artificial intelligence,
additive manufacturing, the internet of things, cyber physical system,
cloud computing, big data, augmented reality, and collaborative robots,
have been empirically tested in the auto manufacturing sector in Brazil,
so as to accelerate the adoption of industry 4.0. Moreover,
Kusiak (2019) also described the characteristics of smart manu-
facturing, which included the prediction technology, the agent tech-
nology, the data storage technology, the cloud computing technology,
the automation and process technology, and the digitization technology
in depth.


In the same stride, Lee et al. (2015) defined Cyber Physical Systems
(CPS) as a collection of technologies that further form a system that
connects and manages the physical assets, with the computational
system. Moreover, Lee et al. (2015) further explained that the cyber
physical system consists of two major processes; (i) the acquisition of
real time data, which comes with advanced connectivity through the
information feedback from the cyber space and the physical world, and
the (ii) smart data management, data analytics, and computing abilities
that build and nurture the cyber space. Moreover, they also proposed a
CPS structure with five levels, namely, the smart connection, data to
information conversion, cyber, cognition and configuration. When we
go further into the detail, the smart connection level provides plug and
play, sensor work, and a tether-free communication mechanism.
Moving on, the data to information conversion level provides the al-
gorithms that are required for the data, in order to carry out the in-
formation conversion. With this in line, it helps the machines achieve a
degree of self-awareness so as to account for the degradation, perfor-
mance prediction and the multi-dimensional data correlation. Fur-
thermore, the cyber level provides a central hub for the information
that has been received, along with the analytical capability for the
status of the other relevant components. Other than that, the cognition
level provides the integrated simulation and synthesis, collaborative
diagnostics and decision making, as well as the remote visualization
capabilities for humans. Finally, the configuration level provides self-
configuration capabilities for the resilience, self-adjustment and self-
optimization of the model. Going further in the same context,
Astill et al. (2020) have successfully shared the snapshots of precision
poultry farming. This is a procedure that uses sensors to capture the
data from various farm operations, while using the big data tools. This
procedure is primarily used when making data driven decisions, and
having a well-connected and networked farm equipment via the IoT
technology, which will lead to the much needed automation and opti-
mization in the farm operations.


In the recent years, there have been studies that have kept their
focus on capturing the issues and the barriers that are related to the
adoption of smart manufacturing technologies. In this regard,
Raj et al. (2019) conducted an extensive review of the literature. This
review was specifically targeted towards the adoption barriers that
industry 4.0 technologies frequently come face to face with. Hence,
through this analysis, Raj et al. (2019) experienced, and listed down
high investment, lack of clarity on the economic advantage, issues in
supply chain integration, risk of security breaches, technology risk, job
threats, lack of standards, lack of skills, and the resistance to changes, as
some of the common barriers that have been experienced (Kiel et al.,
2017). Moreover, Raj et al. (2019) also argued that certain national
policies regarding the technological infrastructure must be designed,
with the support of the government regulations in both the developing
and developed countries. Furthermore, Iyer (2018) argued that the
governments should develop and implement a customized framework
for industry 4.0, especially when it comes to the advent of employment
opportunities and growth. At another instance, Backhaus and
Nadarajah (2019) explained the concept of 4.0 technologies, by ranking
them according to their impact, while also suggesting that


X.-F. Shao, et al.






implementing the 4.0 technologies must initially be implimented on
small scale pilot projects, which capture the organizational needs,
which, in turn, will improve the competitiveness. Other than that,
Ebrahimi et al. (2019) established the concept of the five pillars which
are denoted by cost deployment, workplace organization, logistics and
customer service, professional maintenance, and quality control. These
pillars have the potential capability to reduce the costs and the rate of
loss, as well as the three principles which include the real-time cap-
ability, decentralization, and virtualization, which will eventually help
to overcome the barriers to revolutionize and skew the national
economy towards industry 4.0. According to Kadir et al. (2019), there is
now a need for empirical research, specifically based on the human
factors and ergonomics approach, in order to completely understand,
and break down the concept of the 4.0 opportunities and challenges on
a tactical, operational, and strategic level.


2.3. Smart manufacturing and supply chains


Smart manufacturing explains the interconnected devices, within
the Cyber Physical System, in order to reach a self-evolving environ-
ment that is equipped to manage the variations and suggest the op-
timum alternative and direct routes. However, given the critical role of
multiple entities that contribute on an individual level, in order to
shape the journey from raw materials to the end consumers, it is es-
sential to realize that even if one entity does not effectively adopt the
smart manufacturing concepts, the efforts of the rest of the members
would not lead to a global optima point. In order for the supply chain to
operate like a holistic entity, the smaller individual entities must work
like interconnected platforms, just like the interconnected physical as-
sets that exist within a smart environment. A change in one variable for
a singular entity must initiate a counter and a collective response for the
other interconnected entities (Nasiri et al., 2020).


Time and again, many scholars have highlighted the significance of
the digital supply chain (Addo-Tenkorang and Helo, 2016; Scuotto
et al., 2017; Crittenden et al., 2019; Riemer and Schellhammer, 2019).
In this regard, the previous literature draws attention to the digital
supply chain in the industrial sector (Büyüközkan and Göcer, 2018).
Smart technology is the extent to which the physical devices or pro-
cesses are connected with the various digital platforms. The investment
in smart technologies can exponentially improve the internal, and the
external performance of the company, while incorporating such tech-
nologies within the current supply chain (Nasiri et al., 2020). Fig. 1
below can help the readers to understand the major differences between
the traditional supply chains vs. the digital supply chains.


Grieco et al. (2017) conducted a case study in the fashion industry
in Italy, and found that the decision support system facilitates the users
to make better decisions about organizational activities, all over the
supply chain. According to Ghadimi et al. (2019), a recent research on
the fourth industrial revolution is taking into consideration several
supply chain processes, such as the supplier selection, by applying the
multi-agent technology. In the same context, Weking et al. (2019) de-
veloped a business model with three patterns such as integration, ser-
vitization, and expertization, for leveraging industry 4.0, and showed
that the integration modernizes an existing business model with new
procedures, and also integrates the parts of the supply chain simlta-
nously.


Moving on, Ralston and Blackhurst (2020) found that the smart
systems may provide improved supply chain resilience, especially when
owing to the new skills enhancement and capability development. The
application of the 4.0 enabling technologies tends to enhance the entire
supply chain performance, especially in terms of the procurement,
manufacturing, inventory management, and trading, while also pro-
moting the concept of information sharing and automation, digitiza-
tion, and transparency across the supply network (Factorachian and
Kazemi, 2020). Ghadge et al. (2020) emphasized the need to integrate
the digital businesses, with digital supply chains, such as the in-
corporation and adoption of the (i) digital culture, (ii) new digital
business models, (iii) optimized data management, (iv) connected
processes and devices, (v)integrated performance management, (vi)
synchronized planning and inventory management, (vii) supply chain
transparency, (viii) integrated value chains, (ix) connected customers
and channels, and the (x) collaboration and data sharing for fruitful
adoption towards the concept of industry 4.0.


Preindl et al. (2020) demonstrated that the digital transformation,
and industry 4.0, have the capability to accomplish a fully digital
supply chain through higher transparency in terms of the centralization
of the processes. However, this might not be achieved, if the firms do
not have the appropriate information-sharing standards. While it is
noteworthy that the decision making procedure is associated with the
information exchange across the supply chain, for better efficiency and
effectiveness of the processes. As a continuation of the same context,
Ding's (2018) investigation revealed that the innovations and technol-
ogies related with the fourth industrial revolution, allow for the au-
tonomous decision-making actions for the entire supply chain. More-
over, Machado et al. (2020) identified that the new technologies allow
the industry 4.0 to leave a positive impact on the sustainable supply
chains, and all the sustainability-related dimensions (e.g., sustainable
circular production system and so on), in an integrated mamner. In this


Fig. 1. Source The Smart Factories, Deloitte University Press.


X.-F. Shao, et al.


































regard, escalating the information exchange with the synchronization
into the operations among supply chain partners, allows for the agility,
efficiency, and total cost reduction throughout the entire supply net-
work (Ghobakhloo and Fathi, 2019). The model suggested by
Ghadge et al. (2020) found that the cloud technology and RFID en-
hanced the operational efficiencies through a reduction in the inventory
levels and the costs. This was, however, made possible by an increased
visibility through the data sharing that was taking place among the
supply chain members.


In their study, De Sousa Jabbour et al. (2018) argued that choosing
a method to resolve, identify the appropriate 4.0 technologies, embra-
cing sustainable operations management decisions, creating collabora-
tion in supply chain, and establishing performance enablers for small
attainable targets, are still challenging issues that need to be tackled .
Müller and Voigt (2018) argued that industry 4.0 is primarily con-
centrated on the basis of production, but the integration of the supply
chain management in the context of industry 4.0, is still scarce in the
contemporary research. Additionally, Manavalan and
Jayakrishna (2019) analyzed that the research on the supply chain for
the fourth industrial revolution is still lurking in its initial stages. The
traditional supply chains must shift rapidly in order to effectively and
efficiently adopt the industry 4.0 technologies' principles, in order to
remain in the ever – changing and evolving markets, while the orga-
nizations are constantly finding ways to adopt to these new technolo-
gies (Ghadge et al., 2020). Also, in their study, Buyukuzkan and
Gocer (2018) have highlighted that, despite the advantages of industry
4.0 that are cited in the extant literature, the actual examples of em-
pirical implementation across the supply chains are still scant. Simi-
larly, Scuotto et al. (2017) have claimed that there is a lack of evidence
based on the collaboration through the concept of digital transforma-
tion.


Thus, for the reasons that are cited above, we have essentially fo-
cused on how to integrate the cyber physical system with a digital
supply chain, so as to assimilate the processes for better product
quality, as well as system reliability.


3. Methodology


Given the lack of systematic studies on the implementation of the
industry 4.0 concept across the supply chain, it was decided that for the
purpose of this research, there was to be an exploratory case study
model for the packaging supply chain in Pakistan. According to
Eisenhardt, (1989), qualitative data tends to provide an understanding
of the underlying dynamics of a particular phenomenon. In this regard,
the case study research also helps in obtaining rich data to explore the
management issues in the field of research (Yin, 2009; Eisenhardt and
Graebner, 2007). It also helps to capture the emergent theories, by
recognizing the design of the associations among the relevant con-
structs (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). Moreover, the Inter-organi-
zational liaisons are well studied in ways that are able to produce
qualitative data, and permit the interpretive and explorative analysis as
well (Maanen, 1998). Other than this, the explorative studies seem to
concentrate on the new subject matter that sheds the spotlight on the
research conducted (Brown and Brown, 2006). The purpose of this
study is to use the explorative and qualitative research patterns to re-
veal the potential new approaches (Zikmund et al., 2013) regarding the
integration of the supply chain and smart technologies, which provides
further insight into the impact of such initiatives on smart organiza-
tions.


In order to explore the emerging phenomena of the implementation
of industry 4.0 across the supply chain, a single case design has been
adopted to unearth the dynamics that emerged during the course of the
implementation (Siggelkow, 2001). In this regard, it also helped to
describe the evolution of the firm or phenomena (Siggelkow, 2002).
The single case study method is particularly useful, when the objective
is to model the process that is adopted (Leonard-Barton and


Deschamps, 1988).
The organization for this study was selected using the theoretical


sampling, as it provided the opportunity to capture the evolution of the
industry 4.0 implementation across a supply chain that included the
focal firm, along with its supplier and a downstream customer
(Eisenhardt, 1989, Siggelkow, 2007).


In order to conduct the interviews for this exploratory data, a cer-
tain protocol was developed as a guide for the process
(Eisenhardt, 1989). Semi structured interviews were then conducted at
multiple levels, with the team members directly involved in the im-
plementation process. The interviews were conducted in person at the
plants of the collaborating organizations. Also, the interviews were
transcribed and shared with the team for their further feedback. The
interviews were then triangulated with the data on the projects carried
out during the various implementation phases. Based on the analysis of
the case data, an implementation framework was then proposed, which
was shared with the implementing managers, plus the industry 4.0
researchers, in order to validate the findings.


4. Case data


The incorporation of the supply chain integration (digitization) for
the purpose of problem solving, captures an example from a multi-
national corporation's Pakistan based factory (called as the focal firm
from here onwards). The focal firm operates in the packaging business,
serving clients that are mainly in the FMCG sector. The focal firm
provides packaging material for liquid products, which are then filled
and packaged at the focal firm's customer locations. The downstream
customer in this case is a local FMCG company, with multiple divisions,
and this particular case deals with a tea whitening product. The up-
stream part is a board factory, which provides the raw material for the
focal firm. Both the supplier's and the customer's factories are located
within a one hour driving distance from the focal firm.


The problem that cropped up was that there were dents observed in
some of the randomly selected packages (the final product), after the
filling and packaging stage. The objective was to find out the cause of
the dents, in order to resolve the problem in real time at the customer's
filling machines, focal firm process or at the process stage of the board
supplier. Under the pre implementation scenario, whenever any issue or
customer complaint is generated from the customer, it usually comes to
the focal firm. The concerned team would then identify the problem at
their end, by talking to the production team, or they would also talk to
their supplier directly. It was observed that this process took at least
two days to resolve any issue, which resulted in a loss of two business
days which were dedicated to the production of the product. The ob-
jective of the supply chain digitization project was to integrate the
processes, in order to have the relevant data available in real time, in
order to resolve the issues more efficiently, and also to take corrective
measures in a timely manner as well. In addition to this, the focal firm
wanted to reduce the issue resolution time, and hence, improve their
customer service score as well.


One reason cited by the team for not having taken up this initiative
was that, the dents were not frequent, and the end consumers were also
not overly demanding as well. However, they could foresee a change in
this attitude, with the increasing competition in the industry. So they
took it upon themselves to be proactive and solve the issue before it
resulted in a loss of customers. When they started off, the team had no
clue as to why the dents occurred in the final product. They also did not
have any idea regarding the origin of these dents, or the cause for these
dents. Moreover, there were multiple variables that could have resulted
in the dents being formed at the end of the final process. For instance,
these could have been possibly generated from the processes, at their
suppliers’ end, at the focal firm's end, or even at their customer's filling
machine. Moreover, there could also be potential raw material issues,
or a material issue in the focal firm's inputs, which may have created
further issues at the focal firm's processing stage and so on.


X.-F. Shao, et al.






















A team was then formed around this dilemma, to investigate the
probable causes of the dent formation at the final production stage. A
cross functional team was formed consisting of the members from dif-
ferent the various sub divisions, such as the production, procurement,
maintenance, IT and sales teams. This was a quick decision for the focal
firm because of its experience of working in cross-functional teams, and
the kaizen experience during its WCM journey. When the project was
initiated, the data was only being captured at the focal firm's processes,
and the idea was to collect data at three different legs (supplier, process
in focal firm and process and customer end), to see if there were any
possible product discrepancies which could lead to any potential pro-
blems at the last stage, so that those may be rectified in real-time.
Furthermore, the team started discussing about the different variables
that could be impacting the quality of the final product. Thus, they
started off with exploring the issue from the supplier's end. The supplier
was a paper and board mill, and had a long history of a healthy working
relationship with the focal firm in question.


The first step of this investigation was to include the members of the
supplier team in the problem-solving team. The paper rolls were then
delivered with the quality assurance certificate, which is usually called
the Certificate of Analysis. This contained the generic level parameters
of the incoming roll. The team worked on the problem for approxi-
mately a little more than a year, in order to identify, capture and
analyze the data from the supplier's process. The supplier being in the
vicinity, helped the team's working processes, as they were able to plan
frequent gatherings at the supplier's premises, so as to take a first-hand
look at the identified areas.


When the team initially approached the supplier, they were met
with an expected initial resistance from their side. The supplier's re-
sponded to this initiative by claiming that they had been sharing the
quality certificate with every roll, and could also provide the data for
this as evidence. However, the team shared their own lack of under-
standing of the causes, and explained that it was more of a proactive
problem-solving initiative by them, and they were in the process of
learning and wanted to understand the material usage and the process
in order to explore the variables which could have been involved.
Therefore, as there was a long working history with the supplier, they
were able to bring the supplier on board. Moreover, the supplier's own
internal culture of continuous improvement in the quality controls
ensured an active participation and cooperation from their side.


The team then initiated their investigation with the observation of
the process at the supplier's end. The process consisted of three steps,
i.e., the board making, the coating, and then finally the cutting of the
rolls. The mother roll measured around 28,000 m in length, and 4.5 m
in width, which was first cut into four rolls, with an approx. length of
7000 each, and then these rolls were further cut into smaller rolls, with
the widths of 1.5 m, each. The team kicked off the process by looking at
all the available data points which might have been connected together.
Their initial research revealed that the variables such as moisture,
thickness and grammage of the rolls were being captured by a sensor,
and the values were displayed on a monitor. However, the supplier
team was neither aware of the data points, nor the storage of the data
which could be used to retrieve it for carrying out any further analysis.
All they were using was a combined report for the mother roll, which
gave the average values which were never found to be out of tolerance.
Moreover, the supplier's technical staff had also never considered ex-
ploring the process further, since the output met the required custo-
mers’ specs, and never resulted in any significant customer complaints.


The team tried to go in depth with their exploration of the fact that
if the data was being displayed, it must be stored somewhere as well.
However surprisingly, even the IT team could not figure out the loca-
tion of the data storage. They then decided to contact the sensor
manufacturer, which happened to be a well know brand, but that
particular company did not offer any services in Pakistan. Other than
that, they also contacted the machine manufacturer, but could not find
much information from their side either. The team then contacted


another international company, which offered the sensors and the allied
product of this category. But, the catch was that this particular com-
pany offered a solution for Five Hundred Thousand Euros. However, at
this stage of the project, with no information of the variables that could
be causing defects later, this price was not deemed appropriate and this
solution was dropped from the consideration set.


With no input from the sensor manufacturer in sight, the team
started to look for improvised solutions. They discussed options that
were as simple as stationing a human in front of the screen to capture
the data manually. On the other extreme, they also thought of capturing
the images, by using a camera, and then using artificial intelligence
techniques to capture the data that was being recorded but was lost.
Before going any further, the team was also expanded, and an AI re-
searcher was added from a leading university in the city. The amended
team with enhanced IT capabilities was now able to extract a text file
from the sensor's data that was being captured. The next step was to
map the points on the data file. In this regard, the team found that the
sensor moved along the width of the machine, while the board moved
beneath. As a result of this movement, the sensor captured data in di-
agonal directions on the paper board. The next step after this was for
the team to come up with algorithms that could be used to map the
points on the paper board. This entire effort of engaging the supplier,
team formation, data exploration, addition of academic researchers,
data capturing and algorithm development to map data, took almost a
year to materialize.


Equipped with the data from the supplier, the team then moved on
to study the product at the focal firm. The next step in this regard was to
link the data coming from the supplier, with the machine that was
running at the focal firm. One step that could have impacted the
properties of the paper board, was the production of crease marks on
the board, which facilitated the package formation at the filling ma-
chines that were set up at the customer's end. These creases were
formed by passing the board between a male plate and a female plate.
Thus, the creases formed contained certain properties, in terms of
height of the crease, width and the gradient, that were collectively
called as the crease profile. The probable impact of the crease profile
had never been explored earlier by anyone working in these companies.
In addition to this, there was no mechanism available to measure the
crease profile.


Keeping these limitations in check, the team started exploring
multiple options to come up with a plausible explanation of the da-
maged paper rolls. One idea was to develop a crease profiler. Therefore,
the team, with assistance from their academic network, developed a
crease profiler which was equipped with a laser sensor. The sensor
moved along on the packaging material, specifically where the creases
were present, and measured the crease profile. The sensor also read a
crease, and based on that, summarized the other three creases, while
moving on to the other patterns that were present (collectively, there
were three creases at the right angle that came together to form a
corner, on which the bending was being studied). This activity un-
earthed the fact that significant variations were present in the crease
profiles. The measured crease patterns for every roll were then mapped
on the roll data.


The problem happened to be the dents in the final product, after
filling and packing the product. While, the objective was to find out the
cause of the dents, in order to fix the problem in real time at the cus-
tomer's filling machines, focal firm process or at the process stage at of
the board supplier.


Having mapped the data from the supplier and the focal firm, the
next stage was to capture the data from the customer's filling machines,
and to link it with the data coming from the first to entities in the value
chain. At the customer's end, no mechanism existed to monitor the dent
formation in the packages, even as they occurred. Also, the machine
operated with an output speed of 24,000 packs/per hour, and it was
only after a batch had been manufactured, that the dents were identi-
fied through visual monitoring.


X.-F. Shao, et al.


















Once again in a fix, the team sat down to deliberate the available
options of capturing the defects first, and then link them with the
available data. They decided to install high speed cameras at the filling
machine, where the packet was exiting the machine from. In order to
capture the dents, they decided to make use of Artificial Intelligence. As
a first step however, the different visual profiles of the dents on the
packages were captured, and fed into the system. They developed a
machine learning module, which would give a positive signal for the
dents that were deemed similar to ones fed to the data base.


Moreover, they also installed a camera at the customer machine.
Interestingly, this camera caught certain dents, which were not possible
to be caught by the human eye. Once a dent was identified, the next
step was to work backwards to plot the dents on the data available on
the paper board properties, and the crease profile. The idea was to look
for any correlation of the crease profile, most specifically, the crease
height (they found that the crease height was the most significant), and
see whether there were any variations in the crease height around that
point. Data analysis revealed that every roll had a unique ID, and before
putting the roll on to the filling machine, the roll ID was scanned. In the
case of a dent, that particular point was correlated with the existing
data of the board mill, as well as the focal firm data.


During the first stage of the implementation, the camera was just
capturing the top of the packet. The next stage planned was to install a
camera under the filling machine to capture the dents at the bottom.
This required more collaboration with the customers, as putting a
camera beneath the required modification of machine at the customer
end was a risky initiative to take. As a subsequent task, the team also
planned on connecting the system with a mobile application, which
would be activated with the dent identification, while linking together,
the data collected from three areas; the sensors at the supplier and the
focal company, plus the camera installed at the customer's end.


5. Discussion


Recent advances in the technology have led to the development of
smart factories, or at least have initiated a journey towards that di-
rection. The smart factories/industry 4.0 consist of a networked and
interconnected system, where the information flow is optimized be-
tween the physical infrastructure and the cyber space. With the help of
the advanced data management and analytics tools, the entire system is
expected to perform optimally. However, until and unless the smart
factory concept is not translated across the supply chain i.e. smart
supply chains, the benefits of industry 4.0 concept would not materi-
alize in its true essence. Numerous big businesses, as well as the small
businesses, are shifting towards smart manufacturing. These include
businesses such as the automotive, electrical, pharmaceutical, and the
defense organizations (Müller, 2019).


This study has explored the start to end journey, using the industry
4.0 concepts, to link multiple tiers across the supply chain. The inter-
play between the multiple entities was initiated by a need or a problem
that appeared at the downstream end of the value chain. The lead was
taken by the firm, which was in the middle of the three entities, and
played the role of the dominant partner. The dominance was not only
because of being a major firm in the category, but also because of the
knowledge and implementation of the advanced management tools that
were used to find the solutions (WCM implementation).


The case data depicts the presence of multiple stages in the journey
of the industry 4.0 adaptation, across the value chain. These stages have
been broken down into the visualization phase, first level linkage phase,
connected supply chain phase, and finally the smart supply chain phase.


Phase 1: The Visualization level
The visualization level may also be termed as the trigger phase,


which would underpin the entire idea of the connected supply chains.
Here, the term 'connected' supply chain, however, does not refer to the
term usually used in the supply chain collaboration literature. In the
supply chain collaboration literature, mutual trust leads to the joint


activities, such as information sharing, planning and product develop-
ment, which leads to a higher level collaboration, in order to enhance
the efficiencies across the entire value chain (Chopra and Meindl 2016).
The term 'connected' being used here is considered to be more so in
literal terms, but it builds on the earlier concept, that is, that the
'connection' in the traditional terms is a pre requisite to the 'connection'
in literal terms. This means that it is based along the same lines of POS
data sharing, but at a much advanced and transparent level. The ob-
jective in the POS is the visibility for joint planning (Simchi-Levi et al.,
2003), but here, in terms of the industry 4.0 concept, this connection
forms the basis of automatic decision making by a smart system. Fur-
thermore, the supply chain efficiency is enhanced by the automation of
physical planning, information sharing processes, control, tasks
(Pereira and Romero, 2017) and the end to end visibility across the
value chain (Miragliotta et al., 2018).


In this case, the three-tier supply chain was orchestrated by the
middle entity, termed as the focal firm. This journey rallied around a
problem that was identified at the downstream end. Once the problem
was identified, the focal firm took the initiative, and assumed the po-
sition of the 'champion' of the new journey. This ideally means that the
visualization has to be championed by the firm, which has the re-
sources, vision, as well as the capability to lead the initiative
(Tangpong et al., 2008). This was legitimized by the major and domi-
nant players in the category, the advanced management practices that
were adopted, as well as the key product owner.


The first step started within the walls of the 'champion' firm. A
project team was initiated to address, and chalk out a relevant plan. The
focal firm had already achieved an advanced level of WCM im-
plementation, and was not a novice to the cross functional kaizen ac-
tivities. In fact, it championed the cross functional management ap-
proach under the pillared structure of the WCM model (Furlan and
Vinelli, 2018). In addition to this, the focal firm, in its journey towards
higher level implementation of WCM principle, had been internally
working on the digitization concept, and had an internal roadmap that
was placed in parallel. The human resource was also well equipped
with the basic digitization concepts, and the advanced level trainings on
the role of the digitization were already in place as well.


Phase 2: Level 1 linkage
When considering the level 1 linkages, it was observed known that


once the multi-tier connection roadmap had been visualized, the focal
firm connected with it the immediate supplier, in order to work colla-
boratively to explore and study the problem in depth. However, the
supplier initially showed resistance in owning the problem
(Handfield et al., 2000) despite the fact that the focal firm had a history
of working together (Zhang and Cao 2018) with the supplier, and had
remained not only as a major customer, but had also shared manage-
ment practices, improvement tools and techniques over the years. The
relationship element was essential to bring the two firms together on a
joint platform (Zhang and Cao 2018), where the problem was known;
however, the roadmap was not clear.


A team was then set-up at the supplier's end as well to coordinate
and work with the focal firm's team. There were frequent meetings at
the supplier's plant to explore the various aspects of the problem
(Handfield et al., 2000). The supplier also had an existing culture of
carrying out problem solving and continuous improvement activities
through these teams, so the two teams were soon merged into a single
team that was headed by the focal firm personnel. The physical
proximity and cultural similarity between the two organizations also
helped in the coordination and the sharing of ideas for an extended
period of time (Cannon et al., 2010).


The team carried on to explore the answers to their questions,
looking at different solutions while engaging different stakeholders
during the course of the time. Moreover, at some point in time, the team
was also expanded by adding academic researchers in the area of data
sciences and IT (Gulati et al., 2012). It was after almost a year of effort
that the team was able to align the data being captured at the supplier's


X.-F. Shao, et al.














end, with the data already existing at the focal firm level. Luckily, the
data existed, but the challenge was only to extract the data, otherwise
the solution would have required going to the next step, and installing
sensors to capture the required data as well, which would have been a
very tedious process. In addition to this, the cloud environment was
used to link the data with the existing data.


The phase 2 required the initial elements of collaboration in which
the past history, continuous improvement culture at both organizations,
physical proximity, and the earlier projects, all helped the two orga-
nizations to move forward towards a solution (Handfield et al., 2000).
This was augmented in the later stage, with the addition to the focal
team, as per the project requirements, the use of smart manufacturing
technologies, such as data capturing, and the IoT to connect the re-
quired components of the two organizations, and also meet the objec-
tives of this phase.


Phase 3: Connected Supply Chain
Equipped with the data from the supplier's end, the team moved on


to gather the data on the required specs at their facility. The first step
was to capture data, in order to build on to the data that was captured
at the supplier's end. The joint team had to set-up the equipment, using
the sensors to capture the data on the crease profiles. This activity
unearthed the process issues at the focal firm's level as well. The next
step was to link that data with the data that was being captured at the
supplier's end (Barratt and Barratt 2011). With the help from the data
science experts, the team was then able to map the data, on to the data
that was coming from the supplier (Gulati et al., 2012).


The next step within this phase was to connect with the third
partner in the value chain. The issue at this stage was, that they needed
to code the physical appearance of the product, i.e. the dents appearing
in the final product. However, there wasn't any parameter or measuring
instrument that could have been used for gaging this attribute. In ad-
dition to this dilemma, the speed of the out, i.e. 24,000 packs per hour,
made it humanly impossible to count the defectives in real time. The
human inspection could only have been instituted post the production
process, with the attached costs and delays going side by side.
Therefore, the team had to explore alternative options which could
automatically detect the occurrence of dents, and then integrate that
knowledge further. With input from the data experts, the team installed
a camera that could make use of the Artificial Intelligence, in order to


detect the dents (da Costa, Figueroa, and Fracarolli 2020; Pang et al.,
2020). The camera was fed the data, so as to decipher which dent would
be counted, and which would be ignored. Once the team was able to
capture the data on the dents, the next step was to link that data with
the paper board data that was coming from the earlier echelons of the
supply chain. During this stage, the multi-tier collaboration, common
objective (Handfield et al., 2000), and the use of advanced tools, such
as the advanced sensing tools, AI, and data mapping, enabled the
supply chain partners to link the relevant data to a central networked
system (Novais et al., 2019).


Stage 4: Smart Supply Chain
The final stage was to link the data together, and based on the de-


fect, the identification made the system self-adaptive by taking cor-
rective measures at the relevant stage. However, this would ideally
require continued investment into the technology aspect of this issue,
and the relationship part as well. Moreover, this would also require
investment in the IoT devices, for the real time information exchange,
throughout the supply chain members (Haddud et al., 2017), RFID
sensors for real time automobile tracing (Barreto et al., 2017) and the
centralized manufacturing execution systems through cloud computing
(Almada-Lobo, 2015). It is essential to understand that this must not be
seen as the end of the journey to adapt to the smart technology that
industry 4.0 aims to introduce in the supply chain processes. Rather,
this was the start of a journey that would hopefully highlight a con-
siderable amount of interconnected areas of improvement, but would
also require repeated commitment in terms of the time and money for
the continued experimentation to take place. Also, this might require
further broadening of the team's profile, as they would have to con-
tinuously move to explore the use of advanced technologies even fur-
ther (Ghadimi et al., 2019).


Fig. 2 captures these stages of collaboration, while listing the
technological aspects of the stages, along with the organizational en-
ablers that are needed to move to advanced stages of collaboration.


6. Conclusion


With the advent of the industry 4.0 concept, the increasing adoption
of innovative technologies such as the IoT, cloud computing, big data
analytics, use of smart sensors, robotic, etc. is being observed across


Fig. 2. Stages of Industry 4.0 implementation across supply chain.


X.-F. Shao, et al.






various industries. The organizations have started to reap the benefits
of deploying advanced technologies in their manufacturing systems, in
order to improve the process efficiencies. However, it is imperative to
adopt this concept from the supply chain perspective for two reasons.
The first reason is that, as organizations embark to adopt the concept of
smart factories in isolation, this might bring issues of compatibility later
on, when the concept would be rolled out in broader supply chains.
Secondly, it is a universal fact that is most commpnly featured in the
supply chain literature that, in order to improve the processes and gain
efficiencies, an end to end approach must be adopted. However, up till
now, only a limited number of researches have empirically explored the
concept of industry 4.0, with regards to the supply chains. Moreover,
studies that have also looked at the supply chain view, predominantly
fall in the conceptual category. Very little research exists with regards
to the actual implementation of the industry 4.0 concept, across the
supply chains.


The exploratory study of the journey of the industry 4.0 application
across the supply chains has been used to propose a phased framework
for supply chain wide implementation of industry 4.0. The framework
consists of four distinct stages of interaction among the supply chain
actors. These stages, while identifying the adoption of advanced tech-
nologies, also highlight the organizational enablers that are essential to
the industry 4.0 rollout, across the supply chain. Moreover, the pre-
vious studies have presented conceptual models, while this framework
is based on the actual implementation study. The first stage deals re-
latively more with the implementation of the ground work that is based
on the visualization of the project, team building, and the cross func-
tional elements, etc. it is noteworthy that, organizations with a history
of cross functional continuous improvement initiatives are better suited
to proceed to the next stage, with lesser efforts. The next two stages,
where the advanced tools such as the IoT, AI, ML are adopted, the
existing collaboration between the supply chain partners, acts as an
enabler. Finally, the implementation of industry 4.0 concepts, across
the supply chains, must not be seen as an end of a project. Rather, it
must be approached with the spirit of initiation of a new journey of
exploration and implementation of the ever advancing technologies.


The proposed framework will provide insights to the companies that
are looking to take advantage of the industry 4.0 concept, across the
supply chains. The framework also highlights the importance of the
relationship elements across the supply chain members, in successful
the adoption of the supply chain wide, smart initiatives. This study also
highlights the significance of expanding the scope of the team, by in-
cluding data experts who can tap into the knowledge that is residing
outside the organizations. This framework also provides a base model to
the researchers, so as to test and expand the framework, by capturing
different industries and geographic regions.


As with other exploratory studies, this study has certain limitations.
The study has relied on one implementation incident of the industry 4.0
concept, across the supply chain. Researchers relying on other methods
of research often question the generalizability of the qualitative or case
based research. However, the objective of the exploratory studies, along
with this study, is to capture a certain phenomenon, in a certain setting,
and to generate a set of hypothesis which can later be tested for gen-
eralizability (Eisenhardt 1989).


This study explored the implementation of only a few tools of the
industry 4.0 (sensor technology, IoT, AI), whereas it did not provide the
opportunity to study the implementation of other technologies, such as
the additive manufacturing, augmented reality, autonomous robots,
etc. Therefore, the future studies could explore broader applications of
these tools across different levels of the supply chains. Industry 4.0 is an
emerging phenomena that requires cross organization coordination and
linkages, which provide the opportunities to explore the relationship
dynamics within the broader phenomena. In addition this, the tech-
nology expertise of partnering firms, along with their history of colla-
boration, also requires to be further explored.


Authorship contribution statement


Xue-Feng Shao: Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation,
Writing - original draft, Visualization;Wei Liu: Supervision, Validation,
Writing - original draft, Writing-review & editing; Yi Li: Project ad-
ministration, Supervision, Writing-review & editing; Hassan Rauf
Chaudhry: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Writing-review & editing; Xiao-Guang Yue:
Conceptualization, Writing - original draft, Writing-review & editing


References


Addo-Tenkorang, R., Helo, P.T., 2016. Big data applications in operations/supply-chain
management: a literature review. Comp. Industrial Engineering 101, 528–543.


Aheleroff, S., Xu, X., Lu, Y., Aristizabal, M., Velásquez, J.P., Joa, B., Valencia, Y., 2020.
IoT-enabled smart appliances under industry 4.0: a case study. Advanced Engineering
Informatics 43, 101043.


Akdil, K.Y., Ustundag, A., Cevikcan, E., 2018. Maturity and readiness model for industry
4.0 strategy. Industry 4.0: Managing the Digital Transformation. Springer, Cham, pp.
61–94.


Almada-Lobo, F., 2015. The Industry 4.0 revolution and the future of Manufacturing
Execution Systems (MES). J. innovation management 3 (4), 16–21.


Astill, J., Dara, R., Fraser, E., Roberts, B., Sharif, S., 2020. Smart poultry management:
smart sensors, big data, and internet of things. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture 170, 105291 2020.


Azuma, Ronald, 1997. A survey of augmented reality. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments 6 (4), 355–385.


Backhaus, S.K.H., Nadarajah, D., 2019. Investigating the Relationship between Industry
4.0 and Productivity: a Conceptual Framework for Malaysian Manufacturing Firms.
Procedia Comput Sci 161, 696–706.


Barrat, M., Barratt, R., 2011. Exploring internal and external supply chain linkages:
evidence from the field. J. Operations Management 29, 514–528 2011.


Barreto, L., Amaral, A., Pereira, T., 2017. Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: an
overview. Procedia Manufacturing 13, 1245–1252.


Brown, R.B., Brown, R., 2006. Doing Your Dissertation in Business and management: the
Reality of Researching and Writing. Sage.


Büchi, M.C., Castagnoli, R., 2018. Economies of scale and network economies inindustry
4.0. Theoretical analysis and future directions of research. Symphonya 3, 66–76.


Büchi, G., Cugno, M., Castagnoli, R., 2020. Smart factory performance and Industry 4.0.
Technol Forecast Soc Change 150, 119790.


Büyüközkan, G., Göçer, F., 2018. Digital Supply Chain: literature review and a proposed
framework for future research. Computers in Industry 97, 157–177.


Cannon, J., Doney, P., Mullen, M., Petersen, K., 2010. Building long-term orientation in
buyer supplier relationships: the moderating role of culture. J. Operations
Management 28, 506–521 2010.


Chan, S.L., Lu, Y., Wang, Y., 2018. Data-driven cost estimation for additive manufacturing
in cybermanufacturing. J. manufacturing systems 46, 115–126.


Chen, D., Doumeingts, G., Veradat, F., 2008. Architecture for enterprise integration and
interoperability: past, present and future. Computers in Industry 59, 647–659 2008.


Chavarría-Barrientos, D., Batres, R., Wright, P.K., Molina, A., 2018. A methodology to
create a sensing, smart and sustainable manufacturing enterprise. Int. J. Production
Research 56 (1–2), 584–603.


Chiarello, F., Trivelli, L., Bonaccorsi, A., Fantoni, G., 2018. Extracting and mapping in-
dustry 4.0 technologies using wikipedia. Computers in Industry 100, 244–257.


Chopra, S. and Meindl, P., 2016. Supply Chain Management: strategy, Planning and
Operation, Pearson, Upper Saddle River, NJ.


Crittenden, A.B., Crittenden, V.L., Crittenden, W.F., 2019. The digitalization triumvirate:
how incumbents survive. Bus Horiz 62 (2), 259–266.


da Costa, A., Figueroa, H., Fracarolli, J., 2020. Computer vision based detection of ex-
ternal defects on tomatoes using deep learning. Biosystems Engineering 190,
131–144 2020.


De Mauro, A., Greco, M., Grimaldi, M., 2015, February, February. What is big data? A
consensual definition and a review of key research topics. In: AIP conference pro-
ceedings. American Institute of Physics. 1644. pp. 97–104.


de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Jabbour, C.J.C., Godinho Filho, M., Roubaud, D., 2018.
Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: a proposed research agenda and original
roadmap for sustainable operations. Ann Oper Res 270 (1–2), 273–286.


Ding, B., 2018. Pharma industry 4.0: literature review and research opportunities in
sustainable pharmaceutical supply chains. Process Safety and Environmental
Protection 119, 115–130.


Ebrahimi, M., Baboli, A., Rother, E., 2019. The evolution of world class manufacturing
toward Industry 4.0: a case study in the automotive industry. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52
(10), 188–194.


Eisenhardt, Kathleen M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Academy of
Management Review 14 (4), 532–550.


Eisenhardt, K., Graebner, M., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunities and chal-
lenges. Academy of Management journal 50 (1), 25–32.


Fatorachian, H., Kazemi, H., 2020. Impact of Industry 4.0 on supply chain performance.
Production Planning & Control 1–19.


Frank, A.G., Dalenogare, L.S., Ayala, N.F., 2019. Industry 4.0 technologies: im-
plementation patterns in manufacturing companies. Int. J. Production Economics
210, 15–26.


X.-F. Shao, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0001





http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0001

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0002

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0003

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLzMTgqwxlG

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLzMTgqwxlG

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0007

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0008

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0009

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0009

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0012

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0012

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0013

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0014

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0022

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0022

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0022

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0023

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0026

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0026

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0026

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optyjqwB8GeTi

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optyjqwB8GeTi

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0027

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0027

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0029

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0029

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0030




Frohlick, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an international study of supply
chian styrategies. J.Operations Management 19 (2), 185–200.


Furlan, A., Vinelli, A., 2018. Unpacking the coexistence between improvement and in-
novation in world class manufacturing: a dynamic capability approach. Technol
Forecast Soc Change 133, 168–178.


Ghadge, A., Kara, M.E., Moradlou, H., Goswami, M., 2020. The impact of Industry 4.0
implementation on supply chains. J. Manufacturing Technology Management.


Ghadimi, P., Wang, C., Lim, M.K., Heavey, C., 2019. Intelligent sustainable supplier se-
lection using multi-agent technology: theory and application for Industry 4.0 supply
chains. Comp. Industrial Engineering 127, 588–600.


Ghobakhloo, M., Fathi, M., 2019. Corporate survival in Industry 4.0 era: the enabling role
of lean-digitized manufacturing. J. Manufacturing Technology Management.


Grieco, A., Caricato, P., Gianfreda, D., Pesce, M., Rigon, V., Tregnaghi, L., Voglino, A.,
2017. An industry 4.0 case study in fashion manufacturing. Procedia Manufacturing
11, 871–877.


Gulati, R., Puranam, P., Tushman, M., 2012. Meta-organization design: rethinking design
in interorganizational and community context. Strategic Management Journal 33 (6),
571–586.


Haddud, A., DeSouza, A.R., Khare, A., Lee, H., 2017. Examining potential benefits and
challenges associated with the Internet of Things integration in supply chains. J.
Manufacturing Technology Management 28 (8), 1055–1085.


Handfield, R., Krause, D., Scannel, T., Monckza, R., 2000. Avoid the pitfalls in supplier
development. MIT Sloan Management Review 41 (2), 37.


Huang, S.H., Liu, P., Mokasdar, A., Hou, L., 2013. Additive manufacturing and its societal
impact: a literature review. Int. J. Advanced Manufacturing Technology 67 (5–8),
1191–1203.


Iyer, A., 2018. Moving from Industry 2.0 to Industry 4.0: a case study from India on
leapfrogging in smart manufacturing. Procedia Manufacturing 21, 663–670.


Kadir, B.A., Broberg, O., da Conceição, C.S., 2019. Current research and future perspec-
tives on human factors and ergonomics in Industry 4.0. Comp. Industrial Engineering,
106004.


Ketzenberg, M., Metters, R., 2020. Adopting operations to new new information tech-
nology: a failed internet of things application. Omega (Westport) 92, 102152 2020.


Kiel, D., Arnold, C., Voigt, K.I., 2017. The influence of industrial internet of things on
business models of established manufacturing companies – A business level per-
spective. Technovation 68, 4–19.


Kolberg, D., Zühlke, D., 2015. Lean automation enabled by industry 4.0 technologies.
IFAC-PapersOnLine 48 (3), 1870–1875.


Kusiak, A., 2019. Fundamentals of smart manufacturing: a multi-thread perspective.
Annu Rev Control.


Lee, J., Bagheri, B., Kao, H.A., 2015. A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry
4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manufacturing letters 3, 18–23.


Lenz, J., Wuest, T., Westkämper, E., 2018. Holistic approach to machine tool data ana-
lytics. J. manufacturing systems 48, 180–191.


Leonard-Barton, Dorothy, Deschamps, Isabelle, 1988. Managerial Influence in the
Implementation of New Technology. Management Science 34 (`0), 1252–1265.


Lu, Y., 2017. Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and research issues. J. of
Industrial Information Integration. 6, 1–10.


Maanen, J.V., 1998. Qualitative Studies of Organisations. Sage Publications, Cambridge.
Machado, C.G., Winroth, M.P., Ribeiro da Silva, E.H.D., 2020. Sustainable manufacturing


in Industry 4.0: an emerging research agenda. Inter. J. Production Research 58 (5),
1462–1484.


Manavalan, E., Jayakrishna, K., 2019. A review of Internet of Things (IoT) embedded
sustainable supply chain for industry 4.0 requirements. Comp. Industrial Engineering
127, 925–953.


Miragliotta, G., Sianesi, A., Convertini, E., Distante, R., 2018. Data driven management in
Industry 4.0: a method to measure Data Productivity. IFAC-PapersOnLine 51 (11),
19–24.


Moeuf, A., Pellerin, R., Lamouri, S., Tamayo-Giraldo, S., Barbaray, R., 2018. The in-
dustrial management of SMEs in the era of Industry 4.0. Int. J. Production Research
56 (3), 1118–1136.


Monostori, László, 2014. Cyber-physical production systems: Roots, expectations and
R&D challenges. Procedia CIRP 17, 9–13.


Müller, J.M., 2019. Business model innovation in small-and medium-sized enterprises. J.
Manufacturing Technology Management.


Müller, J.M., Voigt, K.I., 2018. The Impact of Industry 4.0 on Supply Chains in Engineer-
to-Order Industries-An Exploratory Case Study. IFAC-PapersOnLine 51 (11),
122–127.


Nasiri, M., Ukko, J., Saunila, M., Rantala, T., 2020. Managing the digital supply chain: the
role of smart technologies. Technovation, 102121 2020.


Novais, L., Maqueira, J., Ortiz-Bas, J., 2019. A systematic literature review of cloud
computing use in supply chain integration. Comp. Industrial Engineering 129,
296–314 2019.


O’Donovan, P., Leahy, K., Bruton, K., O’Sullivan, D.T., 2015. An industrial big data pi-
peline for data-driven analytics maintenance applications in large-scale smart man-
ufacturing facilities. J Big Data 2 (1), 25.


Öberg, C., Graham, G., 2016. How smart cities will change supply chain management: a
technical viewpoint. Production Planning & Control 27 (6), 529–538.


Oliff, H., Liu, Y., 2017. Towards industry 4.0 utilizing data-mining techniques: a case
study on quality improvement. Procedia CIRP 63, 167.


Osterrieder, Philipp, Budde, Lukas, Friedli, Thomas, 2020. The smart factory as a key
construct of industry 4.0: A systematic literature review. International Journal of
Production Economics 221, 107476.


Pacchini, A.P.T., Lucato, W.C., Facchini, F., Mummolo, G., 2019. The degree of readiness
for the implementation of Industry 4.0. Computers in Industry 113, 103125.


Pang, W., Qing, J., Liu, Q., Nong, G., 2020. Developing an Artificial Intelligence (AI)


system to patch plywood defects in manufacture. Procedia Comput Sci 166, 139–143
2020.


Pereira, A.C., Romero, F., 2017. A review of the meanings and the implications of the
Industry 4.0 concept. Procedia Manufacturing 13, 1206–1214.


Preindl, R., Nikolopoulos, K., Litsiou, K., 2020, January, January. Transformation stra-
tegies for the supply chain: the impact of industry 4.0 and digital transformation.
Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal. Taylor & Francis, pp. 1–9.


Raj, A., Dwivedi, G., Sharma, A., de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Rajak, S., 2019. Barriers to the
adoption of industry 4.0 technologies in the manufacturing sector: an inter-country
comparative perspective. Int. J. Production Economics, 107546.


Ralston, P., Blackhurst, J., 2020. Industry 4.0 and resilience in the supply chain: a driver
of capability enhancement or capability loss? Int. J. Production Research 1–14.


Rashid, A., Tjahjono, B., 2016. Achieving manufacturing excellence through the in-
tegration of enterprise systems and simulation. Production Planning Control 27 (10),
837–852.


Riemer, K., Schellhammer, S., 2019. Collaboration in the Digital Age: diverse, Relevant
and Challenging. Collaboration in the Digital Age. Springer, Cham, pp. 1–12.


Roblek, V., Meško, M. and Krapež, A. (2016). A complex view of industry 4.0, SAGE
Open6 (No.2) (2016) 1–12.


Rüßmann, M., Lorenz, M., Gerbert, P., Waldner, M., Justus, J., Engel, P., Harnisch, M.,
2015. Industry 4.0: the future of productivity and growth in manufacturing in-
dustries. Boston Consulting Group 9 (1), 54–89.


Scuotto, V., Caputo, F., Villasalero, M., Del Giudice, M., 2017. A multiple buyer–supplier
relationship in the context of SMEs’ digital supply chain management. Production
Planning & Control 28 (16), 1378–1388.


Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 2001. Change in the presence of fit: The rise, the fall, and the re-
naissance of Liz Claiborne. Academy of Management Journal 44 (4), 838–857.


Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 2002. Evolution toward fit. Administrative Science Quarterly 47 (1),
125–159.


Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 2007. Persuasion with case studies. Academy of Management Journal
50 (1), 20–24.


Simchi-Levi, D., Kaminsky, P., Simchi-Levi, E., 2003. Designing and Managing the Supply
Chain: Concepts, Strategies, and Case Studies. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, Boston 2003.


Srinivasan, R., Swink, M., 2015. Leveraging supply chain integration through planning
comprehensiveness: an organizational information processing theory perspective.
Decision Sciences 46 (5), 823–861.


Tang, D., Zheng, K., Zhang, H., Sang, Z., Zhang, Z., Xu, C., 2016. Using autonomous
intelligence to build a smart shop floor. Procedia 56, 354–359 CIRP.


Tangpong, C., Michalisin, M.D, Melcher, A.J., 2008. Towards a typology of buyer-supplier
relationships: a study of computer industry. Decision Science 39 (3), 571–593.


Tao, F., Qi, Q., Liu, A., Kusiak, A., 2018. Data-driven smart manufacturing. J.
Manufacturing Systems 48, 157–169.


Tortorella, G.L., Miorando, R., Marodin, G., 2017. Lean Supply Chain Management:
empirical Research on Practices, context and performance. International J.Prodction
Economics 193, 98–112 2017.


van Lopik, K., Sinclair, M., Sharpe, R., Conway, P., West, A., 2020. Developing augmented
reality capabilities for industry 4.0 small enterprises: lessons learnt from a content
authoring case study. Computers in Industry 117, 103208.


Wang, S., Wan, J., Li, D., Zhang, C., 2016. Implementing smart factory of industrie 4.0: an
outlook. Int.J.Distributed Sens.Netw. 12 (1), 3159805.


Weking, J., Stöcker, M., Kowalkiewicz, M., Böhm, M., Krcmar, H., 2019. Leveraging in-
dustry 4.0–A business model pattern framework. Int. J. Production Economics,
107588.


Womack, J., Jones, D., 2003. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your
Corporation. Simon and Schuster Inc, London.


Wu, D., Liu, S., Zhang, L., Terpenny, J., Gao, R.X., Kurfess, T., Guzzo, J.A., 2017. A fog
computing-based framework for process monitoring and prognosis in cyber-manu-
facturing. J. Manufacturing Systems 43, 25–34.


Wu, H.K., Lee, S.W.Y., Chang, H.Y., Liang, J.C., 2013. Current status, opportunities and
challenges of augmented reality in education. Comput Educ 62, 41–49.


Wuest, T., Weimer, D., Irgens, C., Thoben, K.D., 2016. Machine learning in manu-
facturing: advantages, challenges, and applications. Prod Manuf Res 4 (1), 23–45.


Yin, R., 2009. Case Study research: Design and Methods. Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Zhang, Q., Cao, M., 2018. Exploring antecedents of supply chain collaboration: effects of


culture and interorganizational system appropriation. Int. J. Production Economics
195, 146–157 2018.


Zhong, H., Nof, S.Y., 2015. The dynamic lines of collaboration model: collaborative
disruption response in cyber–physical systems. Computers & Industrial Engineering
87, 370–382.


Zikmund, W.G., Carr, J.C., Griffin, M., 2013. Business Research Methods (Book Only).
Cengage Learning.


David Xuefeng Shao is a lecturer at University of Sydney. His-research interests focus on
international risk management and management capability. He was awarded the first
prize in the ANZAM pitch competition during his PhD candidature and also won the best
paper award in Strategic Management Stream in ANZAM conference. His-research has
appeared in international journals including Enterprise Information Systems, Journal of
Global Information Management, and International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health. Dr. Shao can be reached at xuefeng.shao@sydney.edu.au.


Wei Liu is a PhD candidate in the Discipline of International Business, at the University of
Sydney Business School. His-research interests include corporate strategy in the Chinese
context, international business, technology and innovation. His-research has appeared in
Emerging Markets Review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Enterprise
Information Systems and others. He also served as guest editor in International Journal of


X.-F. Shao, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0031

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0032

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0032

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0032

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0034

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0036

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0038

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0038

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0038

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0039

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0039

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0039

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0041

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0042

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0043

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0044

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0044

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0044

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0046

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0046

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0046

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0047

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0048

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0048

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0049

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optxqKBMLzvoG

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optxqKBMLzvoG

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0052

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0053

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0054

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0057

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0059

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLzokLwjhZD

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLzokLwjhZD

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0061

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0061

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0062

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0062

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0062

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0064

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0064

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0066

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0066

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0066

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0067

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0068

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0068

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optyWfk2RTj58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optyWfk2RTj58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optyWfk2RTj58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0071

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0071

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0072

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0072

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0072

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0073

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0073

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0074

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0076

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0076

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0079

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0081

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0084

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0084

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0084

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLNsS7GlfFD

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optLNsS7GlfFD

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optnLJwKI2eoA

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optnLJwKI2eoA

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optIeiJbc9vYl

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/optIeiJbc9vYl

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0088

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0088

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0088

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0091

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0091

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0092

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0092

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0093

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0093

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0093

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0097

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0097

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0098

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0098

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0098

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0106

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0108

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0040-1625(20)31180-X/sbref0109

mailto:xuefeng.shao@sydney.edu.au




Technology Management, International Journal of Environment and Pollution and others.
He has won two finalists of the AIB and AOM conference best paper.


Yi Li is Senior Lecturer in Discipline of International Business, at the University of Sydney
Business School, Australia. His-research interests include internationalization of firms in
emerging economy, institutional approaches of business strategy, and dynamic evolution
of control in international joint ventures. His-work has been published or forthcoming in
journals such as Organization Studies, Regional Studies, Global Strategy Journal,
International Business Review, Management International Review, Journal of Business
Research, Technovation and others. He has won national competitive research grants
such as National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant. He currently serves as
communication editor of Journal of International Management, and an associate editor of
Chinese Management Studies.


Dr. Hassan Chaudhry is an Assistant Professor at Suleman Dawood School of Business,
Lahore University of Management Sciences. He holds a doctorate in Operations and
Supply Chain Management from North Carolina State University. His-research interests
lie in the areas of Manufacturing Excellence, Sustainable Supply Chains, Supply Chain
Strategies and manufacturing management. Dr. Chaudhry has published in journals like
‘Journal of Cleaner Production’, ‘Journal of Fashion Marketing & Management’ and ‘Asian
Journal of Management Cases’. Besides his academic and research activities, Dr.
Chaudhry actively engages in consulting assignments.


Xiao-Guang Yue is the Adjunct Professor of Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, School of Sciences, European University Cyprus, Cyprus. He is the IETI
Foundation Fellow (FFIETI) and Fellow of Pakistan Academy of Engineering (FPAE). His-
research interests include Artificial Intelligence, Intelligence Information Processing.
Email: x.yue@external.euc.ac.cy Url: https://euc.ac.cy/en/faculty-profiles/xiao-guang-
yue/


X.-F. Shao, et al.



https://euc.ac.cy/en/faculty-profiles/xiao-guang-yue/

https://euc.ac.cy/en/faculty-profiles/xiao-guang-yue/


