









Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers  in  Industry


jo ur nal ho me page: www.elsev ier .com/ locate /compind


An  investigation  into  emerging  industry  4.0  technologies  as  drivers  of
supply  chain  innovation  in  Australia


John  L.  Hopkins
Department of Business Technology and Entrepreneurship, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, VIC, 3122, Australia


a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o


Article history:
Received 19 February 2020
Received in revised form 27 August 2020
Accepted 15 September 2020


Keywords:
Industry 4.0
Supply chain innovation
COVID-19
Big data analytics
Blockchain
Internet of things
Autonomous vehicles
Artificial intelligence
Virtual reality
3D printing


a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t


As  supply  chains  recover  from  the  impact  of COVID-19,  a sudden  acceleration  of  interest  in digitalization
and  automation  is  expected,  as  firms  increasingly  look  towards  digital  technologies  as sources  of innova-
tion  in  the  wake  of  an  extreme  disruption.  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to utilize  the  experience  of  supply
chain  practitioners,  to  ascertain  the  current  level  of  adoption  of a number  of  key  Industry  4.0  technolo-
gies,  understand  what  preparatory  measures  are  being  taken  by firms  to  ensure  they  are  digitally-ready
to  utilise  Industry  4.0  technologies,  recognise  how  and where  these  technologies  are  likely  impact  sup-
ply  chains,  and  investigate  whether  organisational  size  is a factor  in technology  adoption.  This  empirical
study  utilises  primary  data  from  a descriptive  survey  of  supply  chain  practitioners  working  across  a  range
of industry  sectors  and  different  stages  in the supply  chain.  Whilst  the findings  from  this  research  indicate
that  some  Industry  4.0  technologies  are  still in  the  early  stages  of adoption,  amongst  Australian  supply
chain  organisations,  they  clearly  show  which  technologies  are  anticipated  to  have  the  greatest  impact,
what sectors  that  impact  will most  likely  occur  in,  and  which  specific  improvements  they  are  expected
to drive.  Larger  firms were  found  to  be  more  digitally-ready  than  smaller  firms,  and  a number  of signif-
icant  gaps  were  identified  between  expected  impact  and  expected  investment,  meaning  little  spend  is
currently  projected  for certain  technologies  that  are  expected  to  have  a significant  impact.


Crown Copyright  © 2020  Published  by Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved.


1. Introduction


Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, a global survey of 1,116 supply
chain professionals concluded that emerging digital technologies
and innovations are ‘driving massive changes and improvements
in supply chain’ (Deloitte, 2018, p. 3). They were predicted to
completely disrupt our traditional ways of working, by creating
a ‘smoothly running, self-regulating utility that optimally manages
end-to-end work flows and requires very little human intervention’
(Lyall et al., 2018, p. 2). Supply chains are becoming increasingly
sophisticated in the way they connect business partners, promote
collaboration, diffuse innovation, enable data-driven decision mak-
ing, and track movements in real time.


Digital technologies are one of the key components for driv-
ing operational and supply chain innovation (Arlbjørn et al., 2011),
as platforms for generating and exchanging vast amounts of data,
which catalyses improved value creation across all sectors (Kache
and Seuring, 2017; LaValle et al., 2011). Supply chain managers
need to be increasingly aware of the capabilities of new technolo-


E-mail address: jlhopkins@swin.edu.au


gies, if they are to keep pace with the growing demands of today’s
customers, who want everything cheaper, faster and more per-
sonalised (Deloitte, 2018; GSCI, 2017; Montgomery, 2018), and
the disruption they cause can quickly leave behind those who
don’t adapt their digital strategies accordingly (Waller and Fawcett,
2013). In an increasingly digital world, the extent to how ‘digitally
ready’ an organisation is to benefit from the increasing capability of
emerging digital technologies, the better outcomes they can expect
in the long term (Cisco, 2018). This has never been more important
than it is today, as supply chain firms recover from the COVID-19
global pandemic, and increasingly look towards digital technolo-
gies as a mechanism for improving long-term performance, agility
and resilience (Kilpatrick, 2020; Papadopoulos et al., 2020).


Industry 4.0 (I4) is a term that has been widely adopted to
describe what many consider to be the Fourth Industrial Revolu-
tion, the emergence of cyber physical systems to enable automated
manufacturing in smart factories (Lasi et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2015),
which is expected to have significant implications for future ‘invest-
ment, consumption, growth, employment, and trade’ (Piccarozzi
et al., 2018, p. 2). The principle driver for I4 is the emergence of key
technologies, including 3D Printing, Advanced Robotics, Artificial
Intelligence (AI), Autonomous Vehicles (AVs), Big Data Analytics
(BDA), Blockchain, Drones, the Internet of Things (IoT), and Aug-


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323
0166-3615/Crown Copyright © 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

























http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/compind

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323&domain=pdf

mailto:jlhopkins@swin.edu.au

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323




J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


mented Reality (AR) (Fernández-Caramés and Fraga-Lamas, 2019;
Lu, 2017; Rüßmann et al., 2015), and despite its origins in man-
ufacturing, it has wider implications for supply chains, where
the combination of these technologies, with increasing customer
empowerment, has been described as a ‘perfect storm of innova-
tion’ (Howells, 2018).


I4 is a topic which is currently attracting a great deal of
attention from academic researchers, particularly in the field of
manufacturing/engineering, but less has been written about the
broader impact of these technologies, and how their data-driven
nature contributes to the digitalization of modern supply chains.
These technologies could play a valuable role in the future of
supply chains, toward a smarter, better-connected, supply chain
ecosystem (Schrauf and Berttram, 2016), and potential supply
chain application areas for I4 technologies may  include, logis-
tics (Hofmann and Rüsch, 2017; Hopkins and Hawking, 2018),
procurement (Glas and Kleemann, 2016; Hopkins and Sohal,
2019), warehousing (Lee et al., 2018), supply chain optimiza-
tion (Tjahjono et al., 2017), customer relationship management
(Saucedo-Martínez et al., 2018), and supply chain sustainability
(Manavalan and Jayakrishna, 2019).


Australia has been identified as a region having a high level of
supply chain maturity (Baldwin and Lopez-Gonzalez, 2015; Fayezi
et al., 2015), and is widely recognized as an early adopter of tech-
nology (Gill et al., 2016; Power and Sohal, 2002; Ried, 2017), which
makes it an appropriate choice for this investigation. To underline
this decision, a recent industry survey discovered Australian execu-
tives as being ‘more likely’ to invest in disruptive new technologies
than their counterparts in other countries (Deloitte, 2019).


The key aim of this research is to better understand the current
adoption rates of emerging I4 technologies amongst Australian sup-
ply chain organisations, and analyse the opinions of today’s supply
chain experts regarding the impact these technologies will have
on supply chains in the future, in order to drive new insights that
inform supply chain professionals and academic researchers, iden-
tify opportunities and challenges, assist business upskilling, and
help direct future education and training in this area.


In order to achieve this objective, these first two  research ques-
tions will be addressed:


RQ1 – What is the current level of I4 technology adoption across
Australian supply chain organizations??


RQ2 – How and where will emerging I4 technologies impact Aus-
tralian supply chains?


Whilst technology adoption is a primary component in any
organisation’s digital transformation strategy, adequate training,
preparation, and the availability of appropriately-skilled staff to
harness the full potential of technologies, is another significant fac-
tor (Cisco, 2018; Lorenz et al., 2015; Pfeiffer, 2015; Schallock et al.,
2018). Therefore, in order to examine that aspect in this investiga-
tion, RQ3 seeks to understand– What preparatory measures are being
taken by Australian supply chain firms to ensure they are digitally-
ready for the impact of I4 technologies?


Finally, the size of the organisation is also of interest, as previous
research has indicated that organisational size is a critical factor
in the adoption of information technologies (Palvia, Means Jr, &
Jackson, 1994; Premkumar and Roberts, 1999). In order to test if
that theory is valid, for the adoption of I4 technologies by Australian
supply chain firms, this final research will be posed:


RQ4 – To what extent does organizational size impact the adoption
of I4 technologies?


The methods adopted by this research, in order to address these
four research questions, will be discussed in the following section.


2. Materials and methods


A descriptive online survey was chosen as the most appro-
priate method for this research, as descriptive research enables
the characteristics of a phenomenon to be studied within their
real-life context (Yin, 2003). Focussing on the ‘what’ rather than
the ‘why,’ surveys are particularly effective for studying specific
populations, and collecting data regarding opinions, attitudes, pref-
erences, and common characteristics (McMurray, 2004). Online
surveys are also an appropriate method for quickly accessing large
populations simultaneously, facilitate data collection in a time-
efficient manner, are convenient for participants to complete, have
low administration costs, and support a diverse range of differ-
ent question types (Akbari and Hopkins, 2016; Evans and Mathur,
2005).


The chosen method provides the researcher with a snapshot of
the phenomenon under investigation, at a set point in time, from
which inferences can then be drawn (Galliers, 1990). The method
does not necessarily claim to establish causal relationships, but it
is an effective tool for collecting primary data about specific phe-
nomena, from which empirical observations can be made (Chisnall,
1993).


In this instance, the online survey was designed to collect
the opinions of Australian supply chain practitioners, and was
conducted in collaboration with the Supply Chain & Logistics
Association of Australia (SCLAA), who are Australia’s largest pro-
fessional association for supply chain and logistics professionals
and practitioners, with a membership of over 3000 active mem-
bers. The SCLAA were chosen as the most appropriate partner for
this research as their membership spans the full supply chain spec-
trum, from manufacturers and suppliers, to third party logistics (3
PL) firms, wholesalers and retailers, and they were identified as
having the best channels available for reaching the target cohort
(Australian supply chain professionals). They also had a shared
interest and passion for understanding how I4 technologies will
impact this profession.


To qualify for membership of the SCLAA, all applicants are
assessed on the basis of their experience and qualifications,
to ensure they are appropriately-skilled logistics, transport and
supply chain management professionals. All new membership
applications also require a letter of support from an existing
member. This membership screening process ensured that SCLAA
members were an appropriate target population for this study.


The SCLAA assisted in piloting early versions of the survey
instrument, and distributed the link to the final version of the online
questionnaire to their membership base, using targeted email lists
and a series of LinkedIn posts. The final survey consisted of 73
questions, including a mixture of multiple choice, Likert scale, drop-
down lists, and open-ended text field responses (Appendix 1), and
was designed to take no longer than 20 min  to complete. An odd
number 7-point scale was selected for the Likert questions, as an
odd number enables an accurate response to be captured from par-
ticipants who are genuinely neutral on a subject, rather than an
even scale which forces them to answer higher or lower than the
mid-point (Malhotra, 2006).


The online survey was accessible for four weeks, and designed
to collect the following data:


• Basic demographic information
• Current adoption rates for digital technologies,
• Predict how each digital technology will impact participants’


firms,


2






















J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


• Predict how each digital technology will impact participants’ sec-
tors,


• Predict the level of investment that will be made in each digital
technology over the next 10 years,


• Current preparatory actions being taken for the emergence of
each digital technology,


• Concerns regarding each emerging technology,
• Free text feedback to capture any additional information the par-


ticipants may  wish to contribute.


Web-based tool Opinio was selected as the platform for this
survey, it has built-in functionality for both authoring and distribut-
ing surveys, and response data was exported directly into SPSS for
analysis. A combination of descriptive statistics, frequency tables,
cross-tabulation and linear regression techniques were employed
to analyze the data. The feasibility of the results, and the over-
arching positive relationship between technology adoption and
expected impact, was validated using the Pearson correlation coef-
ficient method. The project was approved by the author’s Human
Ethics Committee in advance of the survey being distributed.


224 participants commenced the questionnaire, but 21 failed
to complete all questions, and were therefore excluded from the
sample. Similarly, 15 student members were also excluded from
the final sample, as no professional experience or qualifications are
required to qualify for that level of membership. This resulted in a
final sample of 188 usable responses.


3. Theory


Traditionally, investments in new technology are driven by
ambitions to improve productivity and efficiency, increase qual-
ity levels, reduce/eliminate problems, expand data and knowledge,
improve communication, or enhance prestige (Crespi et al., 2007;
Hillmer, 2009). However, simply investing in the technology will
not result in the desired outcomes by itself, as there is a need for that
technology to be used in an ‘appropriate manner’ – this appropriate
use of new technologies is termed ‘technology adoption’ (Agarwal
and Prasad, 1998).


New technologies represent innovation to potential adopters
(Agarwal and Prasad, 1997), and innovation is widely accepted to be
a “multi-stage process whereby organisations transform ideas into
new/improved products, service or processes, in order to advance,
compete and differentiate themselves successfully in their mar-
ketplace” (Baregheh et al., 2009, p. 1334). It is a vital component
of a firm’s competitiveness, and causes organizations to increas-
ingly look to their supply networks for innovative new ways to
achieve process improvement, increase performance, and inno-
vate their business models, which has made it a topic of interest
for many supply chain researchers (Chesbrough and Rosenbloom,
2002; De Martino et al., 2013; Hopkins and Hawking, 2018; Ivan Su
et al., 2011; Kavin and Narasimhan, 2017; Rebolledo et al., 2009;
Simmons et al., 2013).


In an era where supply chains compete against other supply
chains, it is increasingly important to continue the development of
innovative, customer-focussed digital solutions that enable supply
chain partners to streamline existing processes, not just for prod-
ucts and delivery, but across the entire customer experience. In
recent years, supply chain innovation (SCI) has emerged as a field
of investigation in its own right, exploring its role as a mechanism
for enhancing customer value (Munksgaard et al., 2014), and for
driving new business models (Abdelkafi and Pero, 2018). Similarly,
investigations into the role supply chains play in “doing something
novel to produce value in the form of new products and new ser-
vices,” have also given rise to a new Emerging Technology Supply
Chains (ETSC) field of research (Linton, 2017, p. 1).


Von Hippel (2007, p. 1331) believed that, “a supply chain net-
work with superior knowledge management is far more capable
of innovation than a network with less effective knowledge shar-
ing,” and successful supply chain relationships have widely been
identified as key drivers of quality, delivery and cost improve-
ments (Hartley et al., 1997; Kim, 2000; Lau and Lau, 1994; Monczka
et al., 1993). However, Arlbjørn et al. (2011) believe that it extends
beyond that, and the concept of SCI involves a combination of
three key elements – processes, technology, and network structure.
Processes are defined as activities that “produce a specific output
of value to the end consumer.. implemented not only within the
focal firm, but also across the members of the supply chain net-
work,” technology can be “used in isolation or in combination with
other technologies to enable increased collaboration, information
exchange, as well as visibility within supply chain networks,” and
the network structure refers to the manner in which the network is
configured (Arlbjørn and Paulraj, 2013, p. 4). The interrelationships
between these three elements are described as innovations within
the supply chain network (ISCN).


As we enter an era where supply chains are looking to leverage I4
technologies to ‘transform business processes, develop new deliv-
ery models, and create the kinds of experiences that empowered
customers expect,’ driving innovative changes in the manufac-
ture, transportation, marketing, storage and payment of goods and
services, it is important to investigate the implications this will
have for firms (Stachová et al., 2019). Supply chains follow a tra-
ditional SCOR model, of plan, source, make, deliver, return, and
enable activities, and each stage of this model is now being dis-
rupted by technological innovation (Schrauf and Berttram, 2016).
Organisations have long recognised how technological innovations,
driven not only by themselves but by their network of supply
chain partners and customers, have a positive impact on the per-
formance of the overall supply chain, and collaborative innovation
activities have been found to increase the overall innovation per-
formance of supply chains (Wang and Hu, 2017). The enhanced
virtualization of supply-chain interactions that will be possible,
through the implementation of I4 technologies, could enable seam-
less inter-company connectivity, with real-time access to product
and production information, for all participating organisations in a
network (Brettel et al., 2014).


The characteristics of I4 technologies and concepts are viewed
as having ‘high importance,’ for driving product or process inno-
vations, to enable a technological view of procurement, production
and distribution activities throughout the supply chain (Pfohl et al.,
2015). Key benefits from this could include increased flexibility,
optimised decision making, higher quality standards, and improved
efficiency and productivity, enabling mass customization to better
meet customers’ demands (Tjahjono et al., 2017).


Improvements in functions such as delivery and network design,
reducing touch points, removing bottlenecks and decreasing the
time taken for products to be delivered to customers, creates
greater overall customer value and increases the likelihood of
repeat business, to the benefit of all actors in that network.


As Australia demonstrates a high level of supply chain matu-
rity (Baldwin and Lopez-Gonzalez, 2015; Fayezi et al., 2015), and is
regarded as an early adopter of new technologies (Gill et al., 2016;
Power and Sohal, 2002; Ried, 2017), it presents an appropriate
region in which to base this investigation.


When selecting which technologies should form the basis of this
investigation, it quickly became apparent that the I4 field is highly
heterogeneous, and that no unique and concise definition or formal
classification framework for I4 technologies existed in the current
body of academic literature (Chiarello et al., 2018; Hofmann and
Rüsch, 2017; Oesterreich and Teuteberg, 2016).


For example, Dalmarco and Barros (2018) identify I4 as being
represented by eight key technology areas: 3D printing; BDA;


3






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 1. Research Framework.


cloud computing; cyber-physical systems; cyber security; inter-
net of things; robotics; and visual computing. However, Tjahjono
et al. (2017) think slightly differently, and identify VR/AR, 3D
printing, simulation, BDA, cloud, cybersecurity, IoT, miniaturiza-
tion of electronics, Auto-ID, robotics, drones, machine-to-machine
communication, business intelligence and AI, as being the key I4
technologies. Fernández-Caramés and Fraga-Lamas (2019) classify
Blockchain as an I4 technology, and the importance of autonomous
vehicles in I4 has also been widely discussed (Gilchrist, 2016; Lom
et al., 2016).


The term Industry 4.0 was found to be commonly used to
describe a wide range of different technologies, the classification
for which can differ significantly, from article to article. In the
absence of a consistent definition for I4, the list of technologies
chosen for this research were those considered to represent the
most significant I4 Megatrends and NextGen supply chain inno-
vation themes at the time of commencing this investigation, those
regularly discussed in academic and non-academic literature, white
papers, industry forums and corporate blogs etc. (Almada-Lobo,
2015; Barreto et al., 2017; Chiarello et al., 2018; Deloitte, 2018;
Eckert et al., 2016; GSCI, 2017; Ivanov et al., 2019; Manavalan and
Jayakrishna, 2019; Pacchini et al., 2019; Tjahjono et al., 2017). These
technologies will now be defined and briefly discussed.


3.1. 3D printing


Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, describes a process for
creating 3D physical haptic objects from digital data, building up


layers from feed material (Rengier et al., 2010). Mainly used for new
product prototyping in its earlier days, 3D printing now promises
to challenge traditional volume/variety trade-offs in manufacturing
(Bozarth and Handfield, 2008), as a viable option in instances where
production volumes are small, end-user customization is desirable
(Weller et al., 2015), and features need to be manufactured which
can’t be created using traditional means (Petrick and Simpson,
2013). It promises to also disrupt the existing spare parts supply
chain and create a ‘substitution scenario’ which may replace tra-
ditional manufacturing (Khajavi et al., 2014; Rehnberg and Ponte,
2018). This ‘dematerialisation’ of physical products enables cus-
tomers to purchase data, and print the physical version of the
product themselves, unites digitization and servitization (Lerch and
Gotsch, 2015; Vendrell-Herrero et al., 2017). This supports reduced
transportation and storage costs, improvements in last mile deliv-
ery (McKinnon, 2016), a shortening of product development cycles
(Rehnberg and Ponte, 2018), an outsourcing of manufacturing costs
to the end consumer (Rayna and Striukova, 2014), lower energy
usage and a reduction CO2 emissions (Gebler et al., 2014).


3.2. Artificial intelligence


Artificial Intelligence (AI) is defined as ‘agents that receive per-
cepts from the environment, which enable those agents to map
percept sequences in order to perform specific actions’ (Russell and
Norvig, 2016, p. 9), underlining an ability of machines to demon-
strate intelligence, as opposed to humans or animals. Advances
in AI enable real-time fraud and risk management to be per-


4






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 2. Demographic Information of Survey Participants.


formed (Lotakov, 2016); have led to improved inventory placement
(Frommberger et al., 2012), and could remove many current human
tasks from the workplace. The McKinsey Global Institute (2017)
predicted that AI will enable the automation of at least 30 % of
current tasks associated with the majority of US occupations.


3.3. Autonomous vehicles


Autonomous vehicles are vehicles which are capable of “intel-
ligent motion and action without requiring either a guide or
teleoperator control” (Lozano-Perez, 2012, p. xix), they can perceive
their own environment, and respond appropriately when faced
with unexpected situations (Hagen et al., 2007). The integration
of these vehicles, across a range of supply chain functions, is seen
as an important step in the evolution towards digital supply chain
networks (Bechtsis et al., 2018). The potential impact of long-haul
autonomous trucks is seen as extremely significant (Abbott et al.,
2017), whilst the technologies required for autonomous shipping
also already exist (Jokioinen et al., 2016), and autonomous vehicles


are widely promised to lower overall shipping costs, reduce acci-
dents, eliminate driver wages, reduce liability, reduce fuel costs and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions (Bonnefon et al., 2016; Greenblatt
and Saxena, 2015; Heard et al., 2018; Litman, 2017; Van Meldert
and De Boeck, 2016).


3.4. Big data analytics


Big data analytics (BDA), first identified as a performance chal-
lenge for computer systems that struggled to process large data
sets which over-burdened the “capacities of main memory, local
disk, and even remote disk” (Cox and Ellsworth, 1997, p. 4), is
now established as a critical mechanism for driving supply chain
improvement (Hazen et al., 2014, 2016a,b; LaValle et al., 2011;
Novoa and Storer, 2009; Tan et al., 2015; Waller and Fawcett,
2013). Supply chains generate vast amounts of data, as networks
of organizations communicate, monitor and transact, in an effort
to quickly move their products from the point of manufacture
to the point of consumption (Russom, 2011; Wang et al., 2016).


5






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 3. Current Adoption Rates for each Emerging Digital Technology.


These digital networks of multi-directional, real-time, informa-
tion flows enable the identification of new opportunities and
support digitally-enabled supply chain strategies (Schoenherr and
Speier-Pero, 2015). BDA enables better targeted marketing, predic-
tive analytics, more accurate forecasting, improved agility, clearer
business insights, client-based segmentation, and improved recog-
nition of sales and marketing opportunities (Barbosa et al., 2018;
Belhadi et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2015; Hazen et al., 2014, 2016a,b;
Monahan and Hu, 2015; Sagiroglu and Sinanc, 2013; Turner et al.,
2014; Wang et al., 2016, 2018).


3.5. Blockchain


Blockchain first emerged as a public ledger for cryptocurrency
transactions, where new blocks of information are added in chrono-
logical order, to create a history of transactions (Swan, 2015). It has
since grown to become a decentralized system, where transactions
of any kind can be stored securely and permanently which, together
with its time stamping functionality, offers significant potential
for improving collaboration, accuracy, transparency and security
across supply chains (Braga et al., 2018; Francisco and Swanson,
2018; Korpela et al., 2017; Tian, 2016). The digital nature of these
transactions, as opposed to physical assets like cash, also has clear
links to improvements in environmental sustainability (Giungato
et al., 2017).


3.6. Drones


‘Drone’ is a term that has come to describe unmanned aerial
vehicles and micro aerial vehicles. A technology which was origi-
nally designed for military purposes, with assault drones being used
as early as World War  II, drones have now emerged as a potential
solution to many supply chain challenges – such as last-mile/urban
parcel delivery, stock taking, surveillance, the inspection of vehicles
(ships) and infrastructure (roads/bridges/tunnels/oil rigs etc.), traf-
fic congestion and CO2 reduction (Appelbaum and Nehmer, 2017;
Floreano and Wood, 2015; Gregory, 2011; Irizarry et al., 2012;
McGuire et al., 2016; McKinnon, 2016; Nentwich and Horváth,


2018; Schröder et al., 2018; Sun and Zhang, 2018; Troudi et al.,
2018).


3.7. Internet of things


Emerging from research at MIT’s Auto-ID Centre in the late
1990s, the Internet of Things (IoT) has more recently come to
describe a worldwide network of devices, or things,  wireless
transmissions, and computational capability (Atzori et al., 2010;
Boos et al., 2013; Sarma et al., 2000), that supports communica-
tion between “people and things, and things and other things”
(Vongsingthong and Smanchat, 2014, p. 1). These things can range
from sensors, actuators, pumps, and washing machines, to weigh-
bridges, water meters, lights, or RFID tags (Atzori et al., 2010; Gubbi
et al., 2013; Kopetz, 2011; Kortuem et al., 2010; Wortmann and
Flüchter, 2015; Xia et al., 2012), and connect physical items with
the digital world. IoT is predicted to have a significant impact on
future supply chains, as an increasing number of sensors are fit-
ted to vehicles, containers and products, which enable them to
be monitored and measured more accurately (Da Xu et al., 2014;
Hopkins and Hawking, 2018; Zhou et al., 2012). IoT has been linked
with a range of benefits, including an improvement in the iden-
tification of counterfeit products, real-time tracking, predictive
maintenance, more accurate sales data, a reduction in over-
production/underproduction, personalized marketing, biometric
payments, more accurate carbon monitoring, improved competi-
tiveness and the achievement of sustainability goals (Abdel-Basset
et al., 2018; Adhya et al., 2016; Bandyopadhyay and Sen, 2011; Bibri,
2018; Khoo, 2010; Lade et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2016; Nagy et al.,
2018; Peppet, 2014; Shrouf and Miragliotta, 2015; Wortmann and
Flüchter, 2015; Yan et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2015).


3.8. Robotics


Robots are electro-mechanical machines, designed to automate
or assist human tasks, either autonomously or via a set of com-
mands (Eckert et al., 2016; Gunasekaran et al., 2008). They are
commonplace throughout most industries, particularly in man-


6






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 4. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for 3D Printing.


ufacturing and warehousing (Krueger et al., 2016; Shneier and
Bostelman, 2015), and are widely accepted for their effective-
ness in conducting tasks like material handling, picking, intensive
and repetitive labour, welding and inspection, which can lead to
increased capacity, cost reduction and safer, more sustainable,
workplaces (Brossog et al., 2015; Bugmann et al., 2011; Ganesan
et al., 2017; Pellegrinelli et al., 2017; Rui et al., 2014; Winfield,
2015).


3.9. Virtual reality/augmented reality


Virtual Reality (VR) enables users to interact with realis-
tic electronic simulations, of three-dimensional situations, using
head-mounted goggles and clothing fitted with sensors (Steuer,
1992). This helps users to better understand situations and make
decisions, through the provision of a realistic visual experience,
without interacting with the real phenomenon (Choi et al., 2015).
Augmented Reality (AR) describes the ability to integrate virtual
3D objects into a real environment, in real time (Azuma, 1997),
and the potential of AR is starting to be realized as the technol-
ogy reaches a stage where is can create increasingly compelling
experiences (Billinghurst et al., 2015). Both technologies have been
recognized for their potential in training/education, product visual-
ization (Lu et al., 1999), improved picking / inventory management
(Cirulis and Ginters, 2013; Ginters and Martin-Gutierrez, 2013), and
are increasingly been investigated for their ability to create virtual
work environments, that enable meaningful interactions between
colleagues, partners and customers, regardless of their physical
location (Grajewski et al., 2015; Song and Fiore, 2017).


Fig. 1 illustrates the fact that the research gap is positioned
where three key areas of academic literature intersect, and that an
empirical study was adopted to collect new primary data regarding
current I4 technology adoption levels, preparatory measures and
organisation size, to better understand how/where these emerging
technologies might impact Australian supply chains.


4. Results


A total of 188 usable responses were collected, from participants
working in 13 different sectors, with 83 % being male and 17 %
female. Participants spanned all age groups, and were found to be
highly experienced and qualified, with 71 % having worked in SCM
for at least 11 years and 70 % having attained a Bachelor degree or
higher (see Fig. 2). From the technologies studied, IoT was found
to be the most widely adopted (47 %), followed by BDA (44 %), and
Robotics (29 %). The technologies currently experiencing the lowest
adoption rates were Blockchain (12 %) and autonomous vehicles (11
%) (Fig. 3).


4.1. 3D printing


Only 14 % of participating firms were found to have already
adopted 3D printing, only 16 % think it will have a significant/great
impact on their organisation, and only 6% expect to make any sig-
nificant kind of investment over the next 10 years.


The areas where it was  expected to have the greatest impact
were in greater product customization and customer value proposi-
tions (55 %), reduced stock and wastage (51 %) and greater product


7






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 5. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for AI.


customization improved spare parts availability (50 %). Whilst almost
half of the participants (49 %) weren’t currently taking any steps to
prepare for the arrival of 3D printing, the highest figure recorded
for any of the technologies (25 %), admitted they were taking some
form of ad hoc/informal research or self-education (Fig. 4).


4.2. Artificial intelligence


Whilst only 18 % of participants are already using AI, 64 % predict
it will have at least a moderate impact on their organisation over the
coming decade, with reduced inefficiencies (73 %) and improved per-
formance of existing tasks (67 %) the areas of greatest expectation. 25
% of participating firms are already making negligible investments,
to prepare for the emergence of AI, and 9% have already hired staff
with these specific skills (Fig. 5).


4.3. Autonomous vehicles


12 % of participants indicated that they are already using
autonomous vehicles, 84 % indicated that they were not, and 4%
were unsure. 18 % of participating firms were found to be conduct-
ing formal research into autonomous vehicles (via consultants etc.),
in preparation for the arrival of autonomous vehicles on the roads,
and 19 % anticipate that their organisation will spend significantly
in this area over the next 10 years (Fig. 6).


The greatest impact of autonomous vehicles is expected to be
their ability to remove the need for driver wages (60 %) and improved
driver safety/reduced liability (58 %).


4.4. Big data analytics


Findings from this research revealed that 44 % of organisations
are already using BDA, 89 % of the participants expect this tech-
nology to impact their organisation, particularly in the areas of
predictive analytics (76 %) and process optimization/cost reduction
(64 %), and 20 % expect it to attract significant or great financial
investment in their organization (Fig. 7).


BDA is also the technology that was found to be attracting the
most significant level of preparation, with 64 % of firms already
taking some kind of action, with internal training & development
(41 %) found to be the most common first step.


4.5. Blockchain


Only 11 % or organizations are currently using Blockchain, but
69 % expect it to have some sort of impact on their organisation,
and 51 % forecast some level of spend on the technology. The areas
where Blockchain is expected to have the most significant impact,
over the next 10 years, is in improving supply chain collaboration (63
%) and supply chain transparency (62 %).


Whilst 30 % of participants expect the eventual impact of
Blockchain to be significant or great, that figure that rises sharply
amongst the under 35 s, where 41 % predict a significant impact.


Similarly, whilst 51 % of overall participants expect moder-
ate/extensive financial investment in Blockchain, that figure is far
more prominent in the Education and Training sector (77 %) (Fig. 8).


8






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 6. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for AVs.


4.6. Drones


16 % of participating organisations have already adopted Drone
technology, and the most significant impact is forecast to be in B2C
last mile delivery (55 %) and management activities (e.g. stock taking
and crop surveillance – 43 %), but only 9% or participants expect
their firm to make significant investment in drones in the future
(Fig. 9).


4.7. Internet of things


48 % of participants were found to be already using IoT tech-
nologies, which was the highest overall adoption rate observed for
any of the technologies in this study, and more informal prepara-
tory research was found as being conducted into IoT (32 %) than
any other technology (Fig. 10).


Current usage of IoT technologies was found to be particularly
prevalent in the Transport (64 %) and Manufacturing (56 %) sectors,
and IoT is expected to drive the most significant improvements in
supply chain efficiency (70 %), real-time tracking (55 %) and predictive
maintenance (46 %).


4.8. Robotics


29 % of participants were found to be using some sort of robotic
technology today, 44 % forecast further investment, whilst 62 %


predict at least a moderate impact on their organisations over the
next 10 years (Fig. 11).


The greatest impact for robotics was  predicted in the manu-
facturing sector, where 90 % of participating firms are currently
undertaking some sort of preparatory action.


4.9. Virtual reality/augmented reality


In readiness for the emergence of VR/AR, 27 % of participating
firms are investing in informal research, and the most significant
impact of this technology is expected in Education & Training (59 %),
Product Visualization/Design (57 %) and in Creating Virtual Work Envi-
ronments (48 %). 48 % predict that VR/AR will have a direct impact
on their firm, whilst even more expect it to have an impact on their
partners/sector more widely (59 %). 36 % of participants expect fur-
ther investment in VR/AR over the decade, but only 10 % expect
this investment to be significant or great, and 40 % indicate that
no preparation activities are currently being undertaken for the
emergence of this technology today (Fig. 12).


4.10. Concerns


In addition to identifying the benefits of these emerging digital
technologies, the participants also expressed a number of concerns,
with the chief causes of unease being that of security/hacking (62 %),
and the loss of employment due to the technology (44 %) (Fig. 13).


9






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 7. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for BDA.


With data security being such a serious issue facing many orga-
nizations today, with instances cybercrime and data leaks receiving
increasingly widespread media attention, the concerns of the par-
ticipants seem justifiable.


4.11. Most significant overall impact


At the end of the survey, participants were invited to rank all
nine technologies, in terms of where they see the most significant
impact on supply chains occurring in the future (awarding ’9’ to
the technology they think will have the greatest overall impact,
’8’ to the technology they think will have the second most signifi-
cant impact etc.. and ’1’ to the technology they think will have the
least impact). From the heat map  developed from these results,
it can be clearly seen that the technologies expected to impact
Australian supply chains most significantly, are big data analyt-
ics, Autonomous vehicles, artificial intelligence, and Internet of
things. Whilst the technologies expected to impact Australian sup-
ply chains the least are 3D Printing and virtual/augmented reality
(Fig. 14). The responses to this final question align well, and there-
fore validate, the attitudes that emerged towards each individual
technology earlier in the survey.


4.12. Text commentary


The availability of free text fields throughout the survey
enabled the capture of interesting qualitative feedback from the
participants. BDA was the technology that attracted the most com-
mentary, with popular themes being : “Big Data Analytics is essential
for market leaders to maintain their position” . . . “our first step is get-


ting more consistent and modernised system to capture the data” and
“the BI tools are there but they are still not in front of key decisions”.
Blockchain attracted the second most comments, mainly regarding
its infancy and the confusion it can cause, including: “once the hype
around crypt-currencies settles, then the true benefits of Blockchain
will be recognised” . . . “[it is a] very exciting development with poten-
tial that is not yet understood” and it is “still very much misunderstood
in the workplace”.


5. Discussion


5.1. Current adoption and forecast impact


IoT was found to be the most widely adopted I4 technology
amongst Australian supply chain organisations, with 48 % of partic-
ipants claiming to be already using it, whilst BDA was  predicted to
have the most significant impact in the future. Key impact areas for
BDA were expected to include predictive analytics and process opti-
mization/cost reduction, in line with recent literature (Barbosa et al.,
2018; Belhadi et al., 2019), as was  IoT’s capacity for improving sup-
ply chain efficiencies,  real-time tracking and predictive maintenance
(Abdel-Basset et al., 2018; Adhya et al., 2016; Khoo, 2010).


Significant correlation was found to be evident, in the relation-
ship between the predicted impact and current adoption rate for
most of the technologies, which suggests organisations are pri-
oritising the adoption of technologies that will have the greatest
impact on their current business needs (Fig. 15).


However, when plotting the relationship between the expected
impact and future predicted investment, the results were quite dif-


10






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 8. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for Blockchain.


ferent. For example, whilst 63 % of participants predicted that BDA
to have a Significant-Great impact on their organisation over the
next 10 years, only 17 % expected their firms to make a Significant-
Great investment in the technology. A similar pattern to this was
evident for most of the technologies investigated, with results
skewed higher for impact than expected investment, with the
largest investment/impact gaps possibly offering the most signifi-
cant opportunities for future competitive advantage (Fig. 16).


The technology driving the highest demand for new talent
was also BDA, with 26 % of participating organizations indicating
they had already hired BDA talent, underlining a need for these
skills in the supply chain profession. This also aligns with pre-
vious research, that identified BDA as one of the fastest growing
employment segments, presenting clear opportunities for univer-
sities, students/graduates and other training providers (Columbus,
2015; Radovilsky et al., 2018).


5.2. Adoption, impact and spend by sector


Table 1 illustrates which I4 technologies have experienced the
highest levels of adoption to date, are predicted to have the greatest
impact in the future (ranked as either significant or great) and attract
the greatest levels of future spending, for each of the 13 sectors
appearing in this research.


BDA was found to be the most commonly adopted technol-
ogy in the Education, IT and Materials Handling sectors, whilst IoT


was  the most commonly adopted in Import/Export, Transport and
Wholesaling. Unsurprisingly, robotics was found to be the technol-
ogy most widely adopted in the Manufacturing sector, and drones
were found to be the most commonly adopted I4 technology in the
Government sector.


BDA is expected to have the greatest future impact of all the
I4 technologies by the Consulting, Education & Training, Gov-
ernment, Import/Export, IT, Manufacturing, Resources, and Retail
sectors. The Transport and Contract Distribution sectors expect
autonomous vehicles to have the most significant future impact,
whilst Wholesalers expect it will come from IoT.


Consultants expect their greatest spend over the next decade
to be on BDA, as do those in those from the Education & Training,
IT and Transport sectors, whilst participants working in Contract
Distribution expect their highest level of investment to be in either
BDA or Blockchain. The Import/Export, Wholesale, Retail, Materials
Handling and Government sectors all expect to spend most signif-
icantly in IoT technology, whilst the greatest expected spend in
Manufacturing is expected to be on Robotics.


5.3. Large firms vs small firms


In answering RQ4, the technology adoption rates of large firms
(250+) versus smaller firms (<250) were compared, and the find-
ings indicate that larger firms are significantly more likely to have
adopted emerging I4 technologies. This validates the findings from


11






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 9. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for Drones.


Table 1
Highest adoption rates, predicted impact and spend areas, by sector.


Sector Highest Current Adoption Greatest Expected Impact Greatest Expected Spend


Consulting BDA/IoT (42 %) BDA (55 %) BDA (64 %)
Contract Distribution BDA/IoT (60 %) AVs (71 %) BDA/Blockchain (80 %)
Education/Training BDA (38 %) BDA (70 %) BDA (85 %)
Government Drones (60 %) BDA (44 %) IoT (60 %)
Import/Export IoT (67 %) BDA (50 %) IoT (83 %)
IT  BDA (100 %) BDA (80 %) BDA (80 %)
Manufacturing Robotics (69 %) BDA (53 %) Robotics (73 %)
Materials Handling BDA (100 %) Robotics/IoT (50 %) IoT (100 %)
Others BDA (53 %) BDA (65 %) BDA (65 %)
Resources Drones/IoT (67 %) BDA (83 %) BDA/Drones (83 %)
Retail Robots (55 %) BDA (92 %) IoT (73 %)
Transport IoT (60 %) AVs (69 %) BDA (76 %)
Wholesaler IoT (60 %) IoT (33 %) IoT (80 %)


previous literature (Palvia et al., 1994; Premkumar and Roberts,
1999), and indicates that organisational size is still a critical factor
in the adoption of technologies in the I4 era.


The relationship between firm size and technology adoption
was found to be particularly strong for Robotics, VR/AR and Drones
(Fig. 17).


This relationship was found to follow an increasing linear trend
for most technologies, meaning the larger the organisation is, the
more likely they are to have adopted new technologies, across the
four size categories studied. However, the one exception to this
trend was found to be Blockchain, where a higher proportion of


smaller firms (12 %) have adopted compared to large firms (6%),
exhibiting a clear downward linear relationship (Fig. 18).


When comparing the preparatory measures being taken by
large firms, with those of smaller firms, there was  another clear
distinction. As a percentage, large firms were seen to be tak-
ing greater preparatory action than their counterparts, in all
areas other than ‘ad hoc research.’ To illustrate this, Fig. 19
clearly shows how larger firms are far more likely to be appoint-
ing new hires, investing internally, conducting external research,
and contracting out BDA and IoT development, than small
firms.


12






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 10. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for IoT.


However, overall, preparatory measures were found to be rela-
tively low across firms of all sizes. This suggests most firms still
aren’t currently engaging their staff, or external providers, with
regard to formal research and training. As preparation for the
inevitable changes, to the type of skills that will be demanded
as a result of I4 digital transformation, Rajnai and Kocsis (2017)
proposed that education systems should focus on:


• Strengthening science, technology, engineering, mathematics
(STEM),


• Regularly updating curricula in higher education, and
• Offering a wider set of knowledge and skills, suited to the dynam-


ically changing, complex nature of modern work roles.


5.4. Significance of the findings


As Australia has been identified as having a high level of supply
chain maturity, and is regarded as an early adopter of technology,


these results act as a barometer for the current state of I4 technol-
ogy adoption more broadly. The level of detail that these findings
offer, in terms of technology adoption, impact, preparedness and
spending predictions, was previously lacking, and contributes new
and original knowledge to the existing body of academic literature
in this field.


The findings emphasize the broader influence of I4 technolo-
gies, the impact they are making outside the traditional realms
of manufacturing, and their contribution to the long-term dig-
italization of supply chains. They will play a valuable role in
the creation of smarter, better-connected supply chain networks,
which offer greater supply chain transparency, real-time tracking,
better forecasting, improved product customization, a reduc-
tion of inefficiencies, and an increased automation of repetitive
tasks.


Finally, the importance of providing adequate training, and hir-
ing appropriately-skilled staff who  can leverage the full potential
of these technologies, has been strongly emphasised.


13






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 11. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for Robotics.


6. Conclusions


This empirical study has generated a number of interesting new
insights, which extend the existing knowledge of supply chain digi-
talization, and proposes areas of opportunity where I4 technologies
might advance current digital supply chains and service future cus-
tomers more effectively. Whilst much contemporary research is
being conducted into the subject of I4, and the influence of digital
technologies in the world of manufacturing, this research gives an
alternative insight into the current landscape from a supply chain
perspective.


The primary data collected during this study clearly indi-
cates that most I4 technologies investigated are still very much
in the early stages of adoption, within Australian supply chain
organizations, and that impact predications and investment
forecasts vary significantly across different technologies and sec-
tors.


Overall, in addressing RQ4, it was found that larger firms were
better prepared for I4 technology adoption than smaller firms,
which confirms previous theories regarding organisational size
being a factor for technology adoption rates, are still valid (Palvia
et al., 1994; Premkumar and Roberts, 1999). Larger firms appear
to be more likely to adopt emerging technologies, and take more
preparatory measures, which is most likely a result of having access
to greater resources, R&D budgets, in-house support, and oper-
ational capacity to experiment with new technologies. However,


Blockchain is the exception to this rule, where smaller firms have
been the quickest to adopt.


A key contribution of this research is the identification of
a number of significant gaps, between the expected impact of
I4 technologies, and investment forecasts in those areas. In a
number of cases, whilst certain technologies were expected to
have a significant impact on particular organisations and sec-
tors, the investment predications for those technologies were
surprisingly low by comparison. Similarly, the extent of current
preparatory measures were also found to be low, despite sig-
nificant digital disruption being predicted. These observations
have significant practical implications for supply chain managers,
could influence investment planning and recruitment strategies,
and may  provide potential sources of future competitive advan-
tage.


This research also extends the current body of knowledge in
the emerging field of supply chain innovation, as a mechanism
for enhancing customer value, and underlines the impact that I4
technologies may  have in maintaining competitive advantage. It
identifies a number of potential sources of innovation throughout
the supply chain, sectors where particular technologies are pre-
dicted to have the greatest impact, and the nature of improvements
those technologies are anticipated to generate. A reduced demand
for human labor in some areas can be expected, along with the
requirement for new skills in others, which can help inform future
education and training needs. Similarly, these findings contribute


14






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 12. Predicted Impact and Spend Forecast for VR/AR.


Fig. 13. Concerns regarding the Emerging Digital Technologies.


Fig. 14. Most Significant Overall Impact of Emerging I4 Technologies.


valuable new real-world data on opportunities and potential limi-
tations for I4 technologies, which support future academic theory
building.


The interrelationships between these advances in technology,
with improvements in process and network structure, support


Arlbjørn et al. (2011)’s concept of innovations within the supply
chain network (ISCN). Similarly, if technologies enable supply chains
to function in new ways that generate value, this aligns with
Linton (2017)’s Emerging Technology Supply Chains (ETSC) field
of research.


15






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 15. Level of Current Adoption Rate vs Impact Expected.


Fig. 16. Significant Impact Expected vs Significant Spend Expected.


Fig. 17. Technology adoption rates of large firms vs small firms (%).


16






J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Fig. 18. Linear relationship for technology adoption rates of large firms vs small firms.


Fig. 19. Comparing typical preparatory measures of large firms vs small firms.


The author believes that the objectives of this research, to cre-
ate new knowledge and gain an accurate depiction of current
adoption rates, preparatory measures and impact predications for
I4 technologies amongst Australian supply chain organisations,
and the role that organisational size plays in this, have been
achieved. It is hoped that the findings make a noteworthy contri-
bution to a significant field, have practical implications for both
academic researchers and industry practitioners, and encourage
further debate and investigations into this fascinating topic.


One key limitation of this study is its focus on a small geograph-
ical region. To address this issue, the researcher is partnering with
a number of other academic institutions to extend this investiga-
tion outside of Australia, to Europe, Asia and North America, where
the they hope to conduct a ‘compare and contrast’ analysis of I4
technology adoption and usage, across different parts of the world.


The emergence of COVID-19 in 2020 has significantly impacted
global supply chains, restricting the movement of goods and forc-
ing many to staff to work from home, in an attempt to slow the
spread of the pandemic. As a reaction to this, supply chain firms
have had to adapt and find alternative ways of operating, including
the digitalization of existing processes.


An acceleration of interest in digitalization and automation
is extremely likely, as companies seek ways to increase their
resilience to the catastrophic threats they have seen pandemics
can have on supply chains, by automating more tasks and processes
traditionally conducted by humans.


The technologies investigated in this paper will play critical
roles in the post-COVID recovery, and it is hoped that these timely
findings can inform both government policy makers and industry
practitioners, as they prepare their new digital roadmaps for the
challenging years ahead.


CRediT authorship contribution statement


John L. Hopkins: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal anal-
ysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing
- review & editing, Visualization, Project administration.


Declaration of Competing Interest


There are no conflicts of interest to report.


Acknowledgement


The author would like to acknowledge the Supply Chain &
Logistics Association of Australia (SCLAA), and in particular former
VIC/TAS President Charles Edwards, for their invaluable support
and assistance throughout this project.


17










J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Appendix A. Supplementary data


Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.
103323.


References


Abbott, J.D., Gaffar, A., Bisht, M.,  2017. Autonomous trucking: the interplay between
design and business constraints. Paper Presented at the 2017 IEEE SmartWorld,
Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computed, Scalable
Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, Internet of People
and  Smart City Innovation (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI).


Abdel-Basset, M.,  Manogaran, G., Mohamed, M.,  2018. Internet of Things (IoT) and
its  impact on supply chain: a framework for building smart, secure and efficient
systems. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 86, 614–628.


Abdelkafi, N., Pero, M.,  2018. Supply chain innovation-driven business models:
exploratory analysis and implications for management. Bus. Process. Manag.
J.  24 (2), 589–608.


Adhya, S., Saha, D., Das, A., Jana, J., Saha, H., 2016. An IoT based smart solar pho-
tovoltaic remote monitoring and control unit. Paper Presented at the 2016 2nd
International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Energy & Communication
(CIEC).


Agarwal, R., Prasad, J., 1997. The role of innovation characteristics and perceived
voluntariness in the acceptance of information technologies. Decis. Sci. 28 (3),
557–582.


Agarwal, R., Prasad, J., 1998. The antecedents and consequents of user perceptions
in  information technology adoption. Decis. Support Syst. 22 (1), 15–29.


Akbari, M., Hopkins, J., 2016. The changing business landscape in Iran: establishing
outsourcing best practices. Oper. Supply Chain Manage. 9 (3), 184–197.


Almada-Lobo, F., 2015. The Industry 4.0 revolution and the future of Manufacturing
Execution Systems (MES). J. Innov. Manage. 3 (4), 16–21.


Appelbaum, D., Nehmer, R.A., 2017. Using drones in internal and external audits: an
exploratory framework. J. Emerg. Technol. Account. 14 (1), 99–113.


Arlbjørn, J.S., Paulraj, A., 2013. Special topic forum on innovation in business net-
works from a supply chain perspective: current status and opportunities for
future research. J. Supply Chain. Manag. 49 (4), 3–11.


Arlbjørn, J.S., de Haas, H., Munksgaard, K.B., 2011. Exploring supply chain innovation.
Logist. Res. 3 (1), 3–18.


Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., 2010. The internet of things: a survey. Comput. Netw.
54  (15), 2787–2805.


Azuma, R.T., 1997. A survey of augmented reality. Presence Teleoperators Virtual
Environ. 6 (4), 355–385.


Baldwin, R., Lopez-Gonzalez, J., 2015. Supply-chain trade: a portrait of global pat-
terns and several testable hypotheses. World Econ. 38 (11), 1682–1721.


Bandyopadhyay, D., Sen, J., 2011. Internet of things: applications and challenges in
technology and standardization. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 58 (1), 49–69.


Barbosa, M.W.,  Vicente, Adl.C., Ladeira, M.B., Oliveira, M.P.Vd., 2018. Managing sup-
ply chain resources with Big Data Analytics: a systematic review. Int. J. Logist.
21 (3), 177–200.


Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., Sambrook, S., 2009. Towards a multidisciplinary definition
of innovation. Manage. Decis. 47 (8), 1323–1339.


Barreto, L., Amaral, A., Pereira, T., 2017. Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: an
overview. Procedia Manuf. 13, 1245–1252.


Bechtsis, D., Tsolakis, N., Vlachos, D., Srai, J.S., 2018. Intelligent Autonomous Vehi-
cles in digital supply chains: a framework for integrating innovations towards
sustainable value networks. J. Clean. Prod. 181, 60–71.


Belhadi, A., Zkik, K., Cherrafi, A., Sha’ri, M.Y., 2019. Understanding big data analytics
for manufacturing processes: insights from literature review and multiple case
studies. Comput. Ind. Eng. 137, 106099.


Bibri, S.E., 2018. The IoT for smart sustainable cities of the future: an analytical frame-
work for sensor-based big data applications for environmental sustainability.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 38, 230–253.


Billinghurst, M.,  Clark, A., Lee, G., 2015. A survey of augmented reality. Found.
Trends® Hum. Interact. 8 (2–3), 73–272.


Bonnefon, J.-F., Shariff, A., Rahwan, I., 2016. The social dilemma of autonomous
vehicles. Science 352 (6293), 1573–1576.


Boos, D., Guenter, H., Grote, G., Kinder, K., 2013. Controllable accountabilities: the
Internet of Things and its challenges for organisations. Behav. Inf. Technol. 32
(5),  449–467.


Bozarth, C., Handfield, R., 2008. Operations and supply chain management. Strategies
21, 22.


Braga, J., Silva, J.N., Endo, P.T., Ribas, J., Omar, N., 2018. Blockchain to improve security
and knowledge in inter-agent communication and collaboration over a restrict
domains of the internet infrastructure. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1805.05250.


Brettel, M.,  Friederichsen, N., Keller, M.,  Rosenberg, M.,  2014. How virtualization,
decentralization and network building change the manufacturing landscape:
an  Industry 4.0 Perspective. Int. J. Mech. Ind. Sci. Eng. 8 (1), 37–44.


Brossog, M.,  Bornschlegl, M.,  Franke, J., 2015. Reducing the energy consumption of
industrial robots in manufacturing systems. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 78 (5–8),
1315–1328.


Bugmann, G., Siegel, M.,  Burcin, R., 2011. A role for robotics in sustainable develop-
ment? IEEE (Inst. Electr. Electron. Eng.) Africon, 13–15.


Chesbrough, H., Rosenbloom, R.S., 2002. The role of the business model in capturing
value from innovation: evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology spin-off
companies. Ind. Corp. Change 11 (3), 529–555.


Chiarello, F., Trivelli, L., Bonaccorsi, A., Fantoni, G., 2018. Extracting and mapping
industry 4.0 technologies using wikipedia. Comput. Ind. 100, 244–257.


Chisnall, P.M., 1993. Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude measurement.
J.  Mark. Res. Soc. 35 (4), 392–393.


Choi, S., Jung, K., Noh, S.D., 2015. Virtual reality applications in manufacturing indus-
tries: past research, present findings, and future directions. Concurr. Eng. 23 (1),
40–63.


Cirulis, A., Ginters, E., 2013. Augmented reality in logistics. Procedia Comput. Sci. 26,
14–20.


Cisco, 2018. Digital dividend or digital divide? In: Australian Digital Readiness Index
2018.


Columbus, L., Retrieved from 2015. Where Big Data Jobs Will Be In 2016. Forbes
https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-
jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c.


Cox, M.,  Ellsworth, D., 1997. Application-controlled demand paging for out-of-core
visualization. Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Visu-
alization’97.


Crespi, G., Criscuolo, C., Haskel, J., 2007. Information Technology, Organisational
Change and Productivity.


Da Xu, L., He, W.,  Li, S., 2014. Internet of things in industries: a survey. IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inf. 10 (4), 2233–2243.


Dalmarco, G., Barros, A.C., 2018. Adoption of industry 4.0 technologies in supply
chains. In: Innovation and Supply Chain Management. Springer, pp. 303–319.


De Martino, M.,  Errichiello, L., Marasco, A., Morvillo, A., 2013. Logistics innovation
in  seaports: an inter-organizational perspective. Res. Transp. Bus. Manag. 8,
123–133.


Deloitte, 2018. Overcoming barriers to NextGen supply chain innovation. In: The
MHI  Annual Industry Report.


Deloitte, 2019. Success Personified in the Fourth Industrial Revolution; Four Lead-
ership Personas for an Era of Change and Uncertainty. Deloitte Insights.


Eckert, V.H., Curran, C., Bhardwaj, S.C., 2016. Tech breakthroughs megatrend: how to
prepare for its impact. PwC 19th Annual Global CEO Survey, 1–14, 19(January).


Evans, J.R., Mathur, A., 2005. The Value of Online Surveys. Internet research.
Fan, S., Lau, R.Y., Zhao, J.L., 2015. Demystifying big data analytics for business intel-


ligence through the lens of marketing mix. Big Data Res. 2 (1), 28–32.
Fayezi, S., Zutshi, A., O’Loughlin, A., 2015. How Australian manufacturing firms per-


ceive and understand the concepts of agility and flexibility in the supply chain.
Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manage. 35 (2), 246–281.


Fernández-Caramés, T.M., Fraga-Lamas, P., 2019. A review on the application of
blockchain to the next generation of cybersecure industry 4.0 smart factories.
IEEE Access 7, 45201–45218.


Floreano, D., Wood, R.J., 2015. Science, technology and the future of small
autonomous drones. Nature 521 (7553), 460–466.


Francisco, K., Swanson, D., 2018. The supply chain has no clothes: technology adop-
tion of blockchain for supply chain transparency. Logistics 2 (1), 2.


Frommberger, L., Schill, K., Scholz-Reiter, B., 2012. Artificial Intelligence and Logis-
tics.


Galliers, R.D., 1990. Choosing appropriate information systems research approaches:
a  revised taxonomy. Paper Presented at the In Proceedings of the IFIP TC8 WG8.
2.


Ganesan, P., Sajiv, G., Leo, L.M., 2017. Warehouse management system using micro-
processor based mobile robotic approach. Paper Presented at the Science
Technology Engineering & Management (ICONSTEM), 2017 Third International
Conference on.


Gebler, M.,  Uiterkamp, A.J.S., Visser, C., 2014. A global sustainability perspective on
3D  printing technologies. Energy Policy 74, 158–167.


Gilchrist, A., 2016. Industry 4.0: the Industrial Internet of Things. Springer.
Gill, A.Q., Phennel, N., Lane, D., Phung, V.L., 2016. IoT-enabled emergency information


supply chain architecture for elderly people: the Australian context. Inf. Syst. 58,
75–86.


Ginters, E., Martin-Gutierrez, J., 2013. Low cost augmented reality and RFID appli-
cation for logistics items visualization. Procedia Comput. Sci. 26, 3–13.


Giungato, P., Rana, R., Tarabella, A., Tricase, C., 2017. Current trends in sustainability
of  bitcoins and related blockchain technology. Sustainability 9 (12), 2214.


Glas, A.H., Kleemann, F.C., 2016. The impact of industry 4.0 on procurement and
supply management: a conceptual and qualitative analysis. Int. J. Bus. Manage.
Invention 5 (6), 55–66.


Grajewski, D., Górski, F., Hamrol, A., Zawadzki, P., 2015. Immersive and haptic edu-
cational simulations of assembly workplace conditions. Procedia Comput. Sci.
75,  359–368.


Greenblatt, J.B., Saxena, S., 2015. Autonomous taxis could greatly reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions of US light-duty vehicles. Nat. Clim. Change 5 (9),
860.


Gregory, D., 2011. From a view to a kill: drones and late modern war. Theory Cult.
Soc. 28 (7–8), 188–215.


GSCI, 2017. New Supply Chain Technology Best Practices - the Application of New
Technology in the Physical Supply Chain. The Global Supply Chain Institute,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville (April).


Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., Palaniswami, M.,  2013. Internet of Things (IoT): a
vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Gener. Comput. Syst.
29  (7), 1645–1660.


Gunasekaran, A., Lai, K.-h., Cheng, T.E., 2008. Responsive supply chain: a competitive
strategy in a networked economy. Omega 36 (4), 549–564.


18



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0175

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2015/11/16/where-big-data-jobs-will-be-in-2016/#76bceaae608c

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0325




J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Hagen, P.E., Midtgaard, O., Hasvold, O., 2007. Making AUVs truly autonomous. Paper
Presented at the OCEANS 2007.


Hartley, J.L., Zirger, B.J., Kamath, R.R., 1997. Managing the buyer-supplier interface
for  on-time performance in product development. J. Oper. Manag. 15 (1), 57–70.


Hazen, B.T., Boone, C.A., Ezell, J.D., Jones-Farmer, L.A., 2014. Data quality for data
science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management: an intro-
duction to the problem and suggestions for research and applications. Int. J. Prod.
Econ. 154, 72–80.


Hazen, B.T., Skipper, J.B., Boone, C.A., Hill, R.R., 2016a. Back in business: operations
research in support of big data analytics for operations and supply chain man-
agement. Ann. Oper. Res., 1–11.


Hazen, B.T., Skipper, J.B., Ezell, J.D., Boone, C.A., 2016b. Big Data and predictive ana-
lytics for supply chain sustainability: a theory-driven research agenda. Comput.
Ind. Eng. 101, 592–598.


Heard, B.R., Taiebat, M.,  Xu, M.,  Miller, S.A., 2018. Sustainability implications of con-
nected and autonomous vehicles for the food supply chain. Resour. Conserv.
Recycl. 128, 22–24.


Hillmer, U., 2009. Technology Acceptance in Mechatronics: the Influence of Identity
on  Technology Acceptance. Springer Science & Business Media.


Hofmann, E., Rüsch, M.,  2017. Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future
prospects on logistics. Comput. Ind. 89, 23–34.


Hopkins, J., Hawking, P., 2018. Big data analytics and IoT in logistics: a case study.
Int. J. Logist. Manag. 29 (2), 575–591.


Hopkins, J., Sohal, A., 2019. An investigation into talent shortages in the Australian
procurement profession. In: Higher Education, Skills and Work-Based Learning.


Howells, R., Retrieved from 2018. Is Your Supply Chain Prepared For The Perfect
Storm Of Innovation? Forbes.com https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/
28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/.


Irizarry, J., Gheisari, M., Walker, B.N., 2012. Usability assessment of drone technology
as safety inspection tools. J. Inf. Technol. Constr. (ITcon) 17 (12), 194–212.


Ivan Su, S.-I., Gammelgaard, B., Yang, S.-L., 2011. Logistics innovation process revis-
ited: insights from a hospital case study. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 41
(6), 577–600.


Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Sokolov, B., 2019. The impact of digital technology and Industry
4.0 on the ripple effect and supply chain risk analytics. Int. J. Prod. Res. 57 (3),
829–846.


Jokioinen, E., Poikonen, J., Hyvonen, M.,  Kolu, A., 2016. Remote and Autonomous
Ships-the Next Steps. AAWA Position Paper, Rolls-Royce, London.


Kache, F., Seuring, S., 2017. Challenges and opportunities of digital information at
the intersection of Big Data Analytics and supply chain management. Int. J. Oper.
Prod. Manage. 37 (1), 10–36.


Kavin, L., Narasimhan, R., 2017. An investigation of innovation processes: the role of
clock speed. Paper Presented at the Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal.


Khajavi, S.H., Partanen, J., Holmström, J., 2014. Additive manufacturing in the spare
parts supply chain. Comput. Ind. 65 (1), 50–63.


Khoo, B., 2010. RFID-from tracking to the internet of things: a review of devel-
opments. Paper Presented at the 2010 IEEE/ACM Int’l Conference on Green
Computing and Communications & Int’l Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing.


Kilpatrick, J., 2020. COVID-19: managing supply chain risk and disruption. In: COVID-
19  Collection, Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/
articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html.


Kim, B., 2000. Coordinating an innovation in supply chain management. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 123 (3), 568–584.


Kopetz, H., 2011. Internet of things. In: Stankovic, J.A. (Ed.), Real-Time Systems Series,
Vol. 25, 2 ed. Springer, New York, pp. 307–323.


Korpela, K., Hallikas, J., Dahlberg, T., 2017. Digital supply chain transformation
toward blockchain integration. Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the 50th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.


Kortuem, G., Kawsar, F., Sundramoorthy, V., Fitton, D., 2010. Smart objects as building
blocks for the internet of things. IEEE Internet Comput. 14 (1), 44–51.


Krueger, V., Chazoule, A., Crosby, M.,  Lasnier, A., Pedersen, M.R., Rovida, F., et al., 2016.
A vertical and cyber–physical integration of cognitive robots in manufacturing.
Proc. IEEE 104 (5), 1114–1127.


Lade, P., Ghosh, R., Srinivasan, S., 2017. Manufacturing analytics and industrial inter-
net of things. IEEE Intell. Syst. 32 (3), 74–79.


Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H.-G., Feld, T., Hoffmann, M.,  2014. Industry 4.0. Bus. Inf.
Syst. Eng. 6 (4), 239–242.


Lau, H.-S., Lau, A.H.-L., 1994. Coordinating two suppliers with offsetting lead time
and price performance. J. Oper. Manag. 11 (4), 327–337.


LaValle, S., Lesser, E., Shockley, R., Hopkins, M.S., Kruschwitz, N., 2011. Big data,
analytics and the path from insights to value. MIT  Sloan Manage. Rev. 52 (2), 21.


Lee, J., Bagheri, B., Kao, H.-A., 2015. A cyber-physical systems architecture for indus-
try  4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manuf. Lett. 3, 18–23.


Lee, C., Lv, Y., Ng, K., Ho, W.,  Choy, K., 2018. Design and application of Internet of
things-based warehouse management system for smart logistics. Int. J. Prod.
Res. 56 (8), 2753–2768.


Lerch, C., Gotsch, M.,  2015. Digitalized product-service systems in manufacturing
firms: a case study analysis. Res. Technol. Manage. 58 (5), 45–52.


Linton, J.D., 2017. Emerging Technology Supply Chains. Elsevier.
Litman, T., 2017. Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions. Victoria Trans-


port Policy Institute Victoria, Canada.
Liu, Y., Han, W.,  Zhang, Y., Li, L., Wang, J., Zheng, L., 2016]. An Internet-of-Things


solution for food safety and quality control: a pilot project in China. J. Ind. Inf.
Integr. 3, 1–7.


Lom, M.,  Pribyl, O., Svitek, M.,  2016. Industry 4.0 as a part of smart cities. Paper
Presented at the 2016 Smart Cities Symposium Prague (SCSP).


Lorenz, M.,  Rüßmann, M.,  Strack, R., Lueth, K.L., Bolle, M., 2015. Man  and Machine in
Industry 4.0: How Will Technology Transform the Industrial Workforce Through
2025. The Boston Consulting Group, 2.


Lotakov, I., Retrieved from 2016. The Essential Eight Technologies: How to Prepare
for Their Impact.


Lozano-Perez, T., 2012. Autonomous Robot Vehicles. Springer Science & Business
Media.


Lu, Y., 2017. Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and open research
issues. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 6, 1–10.


Lu, S.-Y., Shpitalni, M.,  Gadh, R., 1999. Virtual and augmented reality technologies
for  product realization. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 48 (2), 471–495.


Lyall, A., Mercier, P., Gstettner, S., 2018. The death of supply chain management.
Harv. Bus. Rev., 1 (June).


Malhotra, N.K., 2006. Questionnaire design and scale development. In: The Hand-
book of Marketing Research: Uses, Misuses, and Future Advances., pp. 83–94.


Manavalan, E., Jayakrishna, K., 2019. A review of Internet of Things (IoT) embedded
sustainable supply chain for industry 4.0 requirements. Comput. Ind. Eng. 127,
925–953.


McGuire, M.,  Rys, M.J., Rys, A., Retrieved from 2016. A Study of How Unmanned
Aircraft Systems Can Support the Kansas Department of Transportation’s Efforts
to  Improve Efficiency, Safety, and Cost Reduction.


McKinnon, A.C., 2016. The possible impact of 3D printing and drones on last-mile
logistics: an exploratory study. Built Environ. 42 (4), 617–629.


McKinsey, 2017. Artificial Intelligence Is Poised to Disrupt the Workplace. What Will
the Company of the Future Look Like—and How Will People Keep up? McKinsey
Quarterly.


McMurray, A., 2004. Research: a Commonsense Approach. Cengage Learning,
Australia.


Monahan, S.T., Hu, M., 2015. Sharing supply chain data in the digital era. MIT  Sloan
Manage. Rev. 57 (1), 95.


Monczka, R.M., Trent, R.J., Callahan, T.J., 1993. Supply base strategies to maximize
supplier performance. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 23 (4), 42–54.


Montgomery, K., 2018. A blueprint for successful supply chain innovation. Supply
Chain Quart. (Quarter 2).


Munksgaard, K.B., Stentoft, J., Paulraj, A., 2014. Value-based supply chain innovation.
Oper. Manag. Res. 7 (3–4), 50–62.


Nagy, J., Oláh, J., Erdei, E., Máté, D., Popp, J., 2018. The role and impact of industry 4.0
and the internet of things on the business strategy of the value chain—the case
of  Hungary. Sustainability 10 (10), 3491.


Nentwich, M.,  Horváth, D.M., 2018. The vision of delivery drones. TATuP Zeitschrift
für Technikfolgenabschätzung in Theorie und Praxis 27 (2), 46–52.


Novoa, C., Storer, R., 2009. An approximate dynamic programming approach for
the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 196 (2),
509–515.


Oesterreich, T.D., Teuteberg, F., 2016. Understanding the implications of digitisation
and  automation in the context of Industry 4.0: a triangulation approach and
elements of a research agenda for the construction industry. Comput. Ind. 83,
121–139.


Pacchini, A.P.T., Lucato, W.C., Facchini, F., Mummolo, G., 2019. The degree of readi-
ness for the implementation of Industry 4.0. Comput. Ind. 113, 103125.


Palvia, P., Means Jr., D.B., Jackson, W.M.,  1994. Determinants of computing in very
small businesses. Inf. Manag. 27 (3), 161–174.


Papadopoulos, T., Baltas, K.N., Balta, M.E., 2020. The use of digital technologies by
small and medium enterprises during COVID-19: implications for theory and
practice. Int. J. Inf. Manage., 102192.


Pellegrinelli, S., Pedrocchi, N., Tosatti, L.M., Fischer, A., Tolio, T., 2017. Multi-robot
spot-welding cells for car-body assembly: design and motion planning. Robotics
Comput. Integr. Manuf. 44, 97–116.


Peppet, S.R., 2014. Regulating the internet of things: first steps toward managing
discrimination, privacy, security and consent. Tex. L. Rev. 93, 85.


Petrick, I.J., Simpson, T.W., 2013. 3D printing disrupts manufacturing: how
economies of one create new rules of competition. Res. Technol. Manage. 56
(6),  12–16.


Pfeiffer, S., 2015. Effects of Industry 4.0 on Vocational Education and Training. Insti-
tute of Technology Assessment, Vienna.


Pfohl, H.-C., Yahsi, B., Kurnaz, T., 2015. The impact of industry 4.0 on the supply
Chain. Paper Presented at the Innovations and Strategies for Logistics and Supply
Chains: Technologies, Business Models and Risk Management. Proceedings of
the  Hamburg International Conference of Logistics (HICL), Vol. 20.


Piccarozzi, M.,  Aquilani, B., Gatti, C., 2018. Industry 4.0 in management studies: a
systematic literature review. Sustainability 10 (10), 3821.


Power, D.J., Sohal, A.S., 2002. Implementation and usage of electronic commerce in
managing the supply chain: a comparative study of ten Australian companies.
Benchmarking Int. J. 9 (2), 190–208.


Premkumar, G., Roberts, M.,  1999. Adoption of new information technologies in rural
small businesses. Omega 27 (4), 467–484.


Radovilsky, Z., Hegde, V., Acharya, A., Uma, U., 2018. Skills requirements of business
data analytics and data science jobs: a comparative analysis. J. Supply Chain
Oper. Manage. 16 (1), 82.


Rajnai, Z., Kocsis, I., 2017. Labor market risks of industry 4.0, digitization, robots
and  AI. Paper Presented at the 2017 IEEE 15th International Symposium on
Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY).


19



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0375

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2018/11/28/is-your-supply-chain-prepared-for-the-perfect-storm-of-innovation/amp/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0420

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/covid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0670




J.L. Hopkins Computers in Industry 125 (2021) 103323


Rayna, T., Striukova, L., 2014. The impact of 3D printing technologies on business
model innovation. In: Digital Enterprise Design & Management. Springer, pp.
119–132.


Rebolledo, C., Halley, A., Nagati, H., 2009. The effects of absorptive capacity on opera-
tional performance within the context of customer-supplier relationships. Paper
Presented at the Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal.


Rehnberg, M.,  Ponte, S., 2018. From smiling to smirking? 3D printing, upgrading and
the restructuring of global value chains. Glob. Netw. 18 (1), 57–80.


Rengier, F., Mehndiratta, A., Von Tengg-Kobligk, H., Zechmann, C.M., Unterhin-
ninghofen, R., Kauczor, H.-U., Giesel, F.L., 2010. 3D printing based on imaging
data: review of medical applications. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 5 (4),
335–341.


Ried, J., 2017. Australia Well-placed to Embrace Change and Test New Technologies.
New Daily (October).


Rui, G., Feng, Z., Lei, C., Jun, Y., 2014. A mobile robot for inspection of overhead trans-
mission lines. Paper Presented at the Applied Robotics for the Power Industry
(CARPI), 2014 3rd International Conference on.


Russell, S.J., Norvig, P., 2016. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson
Education Limited, Malaysia.


Rüßmann, M.,  Lorenz, M.,  Gerbert, P., Waldner, M., Justus, J., Engel, P., Harnisch,
M.,  2015. Industry 4.0: the Future of Productivity and Growth in Manufacturing
Industries. Boston Consulting Group, pp. 9.


Russom, P., 2011. Big data analytics. In: TDWI Best Practices Report., pp. 40, fourth
quarter, 19.


Sagiroglu, S., Sinanc, D., 2013. Big data: a review. Paper Presented at the Collaboration
Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2013 International Conference on.


Sarma, S., Brock, D.L., Ashton, K., 2000. The networked physical world. In: Auto-ID
Center White Paper MIT-AUTOID-WH-001.


Saucedo-Martínez, J.A., Pérez-Lara, M.,  Marmolejo-Saucedo, J.A., Salais-Fierro, T.E.,
Vasant, P., 2018. Industry 4.0 framework for management and operations: a
review. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 9 (3), 789–801.


Schallock, B., Rybski, C., Jochem, R., Kohl, H., 2018. Learning Factory for Industry 4.0
to  provide future skills beyond technical training. Procedia Manuf. 23, 27–32.


Schoenherr, T., Speier-Pero, C., 2015. Data science, predictive analytics, and big data
in  supply chain management: current state and future potential. J. Bus. Logist.
36  (1), 120–132.


Schrauf, S., Berttram, P., 2016. Industry 4.0: how digitization makes the supply chain
more efficient, agile, and customer-focused. In: Strategy&., pp. 1–32.


Schröder, J., Heid, B., Neuhaus, F., Kässer, M., Klink, C., Tatomir, S., 2018. Fast forward-
ing last-mile delivery – implications for the ecosystem. In: Travel, Transport, and
Logistics and Advanced Industries.


Shneier, M.,  Bostelman, R., 2015. Literature Review of Mobile Robots for Manu-
facturing. National Institute of Standards and Technology, US Department of
Commerce.


Shrouf, F., Miragliotta, G., 2015. Energy management based on Internet of Things:
practices and framework for adoption in production management. J. Clean. Prod.
100, 235–246.


Simmons, G., Palmer, M.,  Truong, Y., 2013. Inscribing value on business model inno-
vations: insights from industrial projects commercializing disruptive digital
innovations. Ind. Mark. Manag. 42 (5), 744–754.


Song, J., Fiore, S.M., 2017. VR what we  eat: guidelines for designing and assessing
virtual environments as a persuasive technology to promote sustainability and
health. Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting.


Stachová, K., Papula, J., Stacho, Z., Kohnová, L., 2019. External partnerships in
employee education and development as the key to facing industry 4.0 chal-
lenges. Sustainability 11 (2), 345.


Steuer, J., 1992. Defining virtual reality: dimensions determining telepresence. J.
Commun. 42 (4), 73–93.


Sun, Z., Zhang, Y., 2018. Using drones and 3D modeling to survey tibetan architectural
heritage: a case study with the multi-door stupa. Sustainability 10 (7), 2259.


Swan, M.,  2015. Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Tan, K.H., Zhan, Y., Ji, G., Ye, F., Chang, C., 2015. Harvesting big data to enhance sup-


ply chain innovation capabilities: an analytic infrastructure based on deduction
graph. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 165, 223–233.


Tian, F., 2016. An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID
&  blockchain technology. Paper Presented at the Service Systems and Service
Management (ICSSSM), 2016 13th International Conference on.


Tjahjono, B., Esplugues, C., Ares, E., Pelaez, G., 2017. What does industry 4.0 mean to
supply chain? Procedia Manuf. 13, 1175–1182.


Troudi, A., Addouche, S.-A., Dellagi, S., Mhamedi, A., 2018. Sizing of the drone delivery
fleet considering energy autonomy. Sustainability 10 (9), 3344.


Turner, V., Gantz, J.F., Reinsel, D., Minton, S., 2014. The digital universe of opportuni-
ties: rich data and the increasing value of the internet of things. In: IDC Analyze
the  Future., pp. 16.


Van Meldert, B., De Boeck, L., 2016. Introducing Autonomous Vehicles in Logistics:
a  Review From a Broad Perspective.


Vendrell-Herrero, F., Bustinza, O.F., Parry, G., Georgantzis, N., 2017. Servitization,
digitization and supply chain interdependency. Ind. Mark. Manag. 60, 69–81.


Von Hippel, E., 2007. The sources of innovation. In: Das Summa  Summarum des
Management. Springer, pp. 111–120.


Vongsingthong, S., Smanchat, S., 2014. Internet of things: a review of applications &
technologies. Suranaree J. Sci. Technol. 21 (4), 1–37.


Waller, M.A., Fawcett, S.E., 2013. Data science, predictive analytics, and big data:
a  revolution that will transform supply chain design and management. J. Bus.
Logist. 34 (2), 77–84.


Wang, C., Hu, Q., 2017. Knowledge Sharing in Supply Chain Networks: Effects of
Collaborative Innovation Activities and Capability on Innovation Performance.
Technovation.


Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W., Papadopoulos, T., 2016. Big data analytics in
logistics and supply chain management: certain investigations for research and
applications. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 176, 98–110.


Wang, Y., Kung, L., Byrd, T.A., 2018. Big data analytics: understanding its capabili-
ties and potential benefits for healthcare organizations. Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change 126, 3–13.


Weller, C., Kleer, R., Piller, F.T., 2015. Economic implications of 3D printing: market
structure models in light of additive manufacturing revisited. Int. J. Prod. Econ.
164,  43–56.


Winfield, A.F., 2015. Robots with internal models: a route to self-aware and hence
safer robots. In: The Computer After me: Awareness and Self-awareness in Auto-
nomic Systems. World Scientific, pp. 237–252.


Wortmann, F., Flüchter, K., 2015. Internet of things. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 57 (3),
221–224.


Xia, F., Yang, L., Wang, L., Vinel, A., 2012. Internet of things. Int. J. Commun. Syst. 25
(9),  1101–1102.


Yan, B., Yan, C., Ke, C., Tan, X., 2016. Information sharing in supply chain of agricul-
tural products based on the Internet of Things. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 116 (7),
1397–1416.


Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd ed. Sage: Thousand
Oaks, CA.


Zhang, Y., Zhang, G., Wang, J., Sun, S., Si, S., Yang, T., 2015. Real-time information
capturing and integration framework of the internet of manufacturing things.
Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 28 (8), 811–822.


Zhou, H., Liu, B., Wang, D., 2012. Design and research of urban intelligent trans-
portation system based on the internet of things. In: Internet of Things., pp.
572–580.


20



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(20)30557-1/sbref0895


