









Int. J. Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


Available online 29 June 2020
0925-5273/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Industry 4.0 adoption and 10R advance manufacturing capabilities for 
sustainable development 


Surajit Bag a, Shivam Gupta b, Sameer Kumar c,* 


a Department of Transport and Supply Chain Management, School of Management, College of Business and Economics, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South 
Africa 
b Department of Information Systems, Supply Chain & Decision Making, NEOMA Business School, 59 Rue Pierre Taittinger, 51100, Reims, France 
c Opus College of Business, University of St. Thomas, Minneapolis Campus, 1000 LaSalle Ave, Minneapolis, MN, 55403, USA   


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords: 
Industry 4.0 
Circular economy 
Sustainable development 
Practice based view 
Dynamic capability view 
Advanced manufacturing 
I4.0 delivery system 


A B S T R A C T   


Industry 4.0 technologies provide digital solutions for the automation of manufacturing. In circular economy- 
based models, the resources stay in the system as it experiences one of the 10 R (Refuse, Rethink, Reduce, 
Reuse, Repair, Refurbish, Remanufacture, Repurpose, Recycle, and Recover) processes. These 10 R processes 
require the development of advanced manufacturing capabilities; however, 10 R processes suffer from various 
challenges and can be effectively overcome through Industry 4.0 technological applications. Although literature 
has indicated the use of various Industry 4.0 technologies, little information is available about firms’ views on 
the degree of Industry 4.0 application in the 10 R based advanced manufacturing area and its ability to achieve 
sustainable development. The current study aspires to examine how great an effect Industry 4.0 adoption has on 
10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities and its outcome on sustainable development under the moderating 
effect of an Industry 4.0 delivery system. Practice-based view and Dynamic capability view theories are used to 
conceptualise the theoretical model. The research team statistically validated the theoretical model considering 
124 data points that were collected using an online survey with a structured questionnaire. The findings point out 
that the path degree of Industry 4.0 adoption and 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities are statistically 
significant. 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities are found to have a positive influence on sustainable 
development outcomes. Industry 4.0 delivery system has a moderating effect on the path degree of I4.0 
implementation and 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities. The study concludes with key take away points 
for managers.   


1. Introduction 


Globally, manufacturers are facing a scarcity of resources due to 
unsustainable manufacturing and resource utilisation practices (Bell 
et al., 2013; Gould and Colwill, 2015). In recent times, manufacturers 
engaged in international markets are adopting various green initiatives 
for sustainability outcomes which can attract more customers (Kawai 
et al., 2018). Through corporate social responsibility programs, manu-
facturers are trying to return something useful to society (Kolk and Van 
Tulder, 2010). However, most companies are failing to achieve sus-
tainable development goals due to their failure of sustainable remanu-
facturing, recycling, and reusing operations. These failures are due to 
their lack of flexibility, visibility and poor resilience (Kouedeu et al., 
2014; Jiang et al., 2016). 


Industry 4.0 (I4.0) technologies can be used to effectively aid digital 
transformations of an organisation to achieve sustainable development 
goals (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018b). It is worth examining how I4.0 
adoption can help manufacturers enhance advanced manufacturing 
capabilities and further meet their sustainable development goals. The 
current study focuses on a contemporary research area, I4.0, which has 
become a popular topic within the research community. The fourth in-
dustrial revolution has brought an advancement in digital technologies, 
which will completely change traditional manufacturing architecture 
(Telukdarie et al., 2018). However, I4.0 technologies pose a challenge 
because they are relatively new and manufacturing companies face 
difficulties such as skill gaps, financial constraints and operational 
complexities in I4.0 projects (Sung, 2018; Raj et al., 2019). To overcome 
these challenges, a proper I4.0 delivery system needs to be developed 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: surajitb@uj.ac.za (S. Bag), shivam.gupta@neoma-bs.fr (S. Gupta), skumar@stthomas.edu (S. Kumar).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


International Journal of Production Economics 


journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107844 
Received 12 December 2019; Received in revised form 16 June 2020; Accepted 17 June 2020   



























mailto:surajitb@uj.ac.za

mailto:shivam.gupta@neoma-bs.fr

mailto:skumar@stthomas.edu

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09255273

https://http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107844

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107844

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107844

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107844&domain=pdf




International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


2


(Bag et al., 2018b). I4.0 provides firms with increased visibility. Man-
agers can access supply-and-demand-related real-time data from a sup-
ply chain network through the I4.0 system dashboards. This could 
provide a great opportunity for organisation learning (Tortorella et al., 
2020) and the ability to run production lines using recycled, refurbished 
and remanufactured components. Operations can easily be optimised 
with the implementation of I4.0 systems and a standard operating pro-
cess aligned with I4.0, which provide several options to optimise busi-
ness processes and significantly reduce resources and lead times (Chuks 
and Telukdarie, 2018; Bag et al., 2020a, 2020b). 


In volatile business environments, companies practicing remanu-
facturing and recycling face problems such as high levels of uncertainty, 
supply-related bottlenecks, production losses, excess inventory, and 
delayed sales order dispatch, which affect the overall operations per-
formance (Inderfurth, 2005). Uncertainties largely influence the 
decision-making quality of managers. This also leads to an increase in 
spending levels, thus reducing profit margins. A supply crisis majorly 
impacts manufacturing schedules and increases backlogs, leading to 
production loss and lower customer satisfaction levels. A lack of visi-
bility causes difficulty in performing accurate sales forecasting of 
remanufactured/recycled products. To avoid losing customer orders, 
firms maintain slack resources, i.e. stocking all high lead time related 
inputs/raw material. The disadvantage to stocking these items is a 
blockage of working capital. Further, with increasing technological 
changes, an increased chance of stock becoming obsolete at some point 
of time can also result in huge financial losses. A delay in sales order 
dispatch and the inability to meet customers’ requested dates can result 
in customer dissatisfaction. Such delays that impact customer business 
can lead to an opportunity loss and can also result in the loss of cus-
tomers (Bag et al., 2018a). However, manufacturing companies that 
successfully adopt I4.0-enabled technologies can improve both their top 
and bottom line simultaneously. As per the PWC report (2016), after 
adopting I4.0, companies can expect a betterment of more than 10% in 
terms of efficiency. These companies can also expect an operations cost 
reduction of more than 10% when they adopt smart manufacturing 
technologies, which can integrate planning and scheduling activities. 
Predictive maintenance also helps to significantly lower machine 
downtime and avoid production delays. Manufacturing companies with 
a high degree of I4.0 adoption when applying front-end and base tech-
nologies will attain operational flexibility, operational efficiency and 
operational effectiveness (Karimi et al., 2007; Frank et al., 2019). 


Manufacturing companies play a big role in sustainable de-
velopments; however, it is also a big concern for high technology- 
oriented manufacturing firms (Law and Gunasekaran, 2012). The 
proper selection of product design, services and transportation can 
lower global warming while allowing firms to become competitive in the 
international market (Gunasekaran and Gallear, 2012). This is possible 
through the development of advanced manufacturing capabilities using 
10 R-based manufacturing approaches such as refuse, rethink, reduce, 
reuse, repair, refurbish, remanufacture, repurpose, recycle and recover 
options that can provide opportunities for cleaner production in the 
circular economy based business model and help firms to achieve a 
competitive edge over their competitors (Kirchherr et al., 2017). A 
positive relationship exists between competitive strategies and 
manufacturing strategies (Amoako-Gyampah and Acquaah, 2008). I4.0 
creates value by allowing better flexibility and visibility (Gunasekaran 
et al., 2017), but a low level of infrastructure and information is 
generally available to detail the expectations from firms that belong to 
different emerging economies with regards to the potential for I4.0 
technologies to cause performance improvements (Dalenogare et al., 
2018). Small and medium sized firms lack understanding of I4.0 tech-
nological applications (Frank et al., 2019). Focus is required on these 
micro and medium sized firms as they are the backbone of economic 
development for any country (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2019). Small and 
medium sized firms are consuming larger portions of resources and 
generating higher volume of wastes, therefore research focus is required 


to analyse different aspects of sustainability (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 
2019). 


Firms apply various technologies to justify their investments in 
processes and novel technological applications (Raafat, 2002). Although 
literature has indicated use of various basic and advanced level I4.0 
technologies, little is known about how firms see the degree of I4.0 
application in the 10 R based advanced manufacturing area to exploit 
sustainable development outcomes. To remove the void in the literature, 
the current study aspires to examine how great an effect Industry 4.0 
adoption has on 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities and its final 
outcome for sustainable development. 


Based on the preceding discussions the research team aims to answer 
the question below. 


RQ1. How great an effect I4.0 adoption has on 10R advanced 
manufacturing capabilities and sustainable development? 


Literature indicates that the stronger the delivery system, the better 
the degree of implementation and the more positive the outcome in 
manufacturing operations (Bag et al., 2018b). The I4.0 delivery system 
involves top management support, training and project resources, sup-
port of research institutes, and universities facilitating adoption of I4.0 
technologies (Bag et al., 2018b). The literature also indicates that a large 
demand exists for information and communication technology adapta-
tion among the segment of small and medium enterprises in South Africa 
(Cant and Wiid, 2016). This gap can be bridged using I4.0 technologies 
(Frank et al., 2019), which can easily connect the shop floor to the top 
floor (Telukdarie et al., 2018). However, there is a lack of awareness 
around I4.0 and its related terms such as internet of things (IoT), in-
dustrial internet of things (IIoT), and supply chain 4.0. To many in the 
business world, the interaction between these terms remains unknown 
(Glas and Kleemann, 2016). Moreover, small and medium enterprises 
consider themselves inefficient when it comes to implementing new 
technology with respect to manufacturing scheduling and control areas 
(Moeuf et al., 2018). Large manufacturing firms face various challenges, 
from sustainable development policies for final products to the real-time 
production scheduling of manufacturing resources (Zhang et al., 2018a). 
Few studies have been completed that are related to the sustainability of 
the 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities while also considering 
Industry 4.0 (Prause and Atari, 2017). The potential of I4.0 to aid in 
developing sustainability-related research is in an early stage of its ex-
istence and requires more attention from future researchers (Bag et al., 
2018b). The current study attempts to answer the second question as 
under. 


RQ2. Does I4.0 delivery system play a moderating role on the rela-
tionship between degree of I4.0 adoption and 10R advanced 
manufacturing capabilities? 


The theoretical relevance of the current study is its focus on three 
interesting concepts, one in the domain of information technology 
(I4.0); the second in that of operations management (10 R advanced 
manufacturing), and the third in environmental management (sustain-
able development). Practice Based View (PBV) and Dynamic Capability 
View (DCV) theories are used as theoretical support to explain the links, 
which the research team believes is the unique contribution in this 
study. 


Section two detailed the main constructs that are central to this 
study, such as I4.0 adoption, 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities, 
and sustainable development. Further, the research team presents the 
two key theories (Practice-based view and Dynamic capability view) 
used to develop the research framework. In section three, the research 
team presents the hypotheses followed by research methodology applied 
in this study. The data analysis and findings are in section five is fol-
lowed by the discussion of the results; and the final sections present the 
theoretical and practical usefulness of the study. 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


























International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


3


2. Review of literature 


In this section, the research team describes the key constructs and 
theories used to develop the research framework. 


2.1. Industry 4.0 


Industry 4.0 (I4.0) research in operations management is gaining 
momentum as digitalization is considered a priority among 
manufacturing companies (PWC report, 2018). A report by Deloitte 
published in 2014 indicated that enabling Industry 4.0 technology 
would lead to global supply chain operations becoming more competi-
tive (za-Africa-industry-4.0-report). Industry 4.0 tools can be used to 
integrate all of the key functions in order to share common data, in-
formation, and knowledge throughout the supply chain (Dalenogare 
et al., 2018; Dev et al., 2019). They can also be applied to automate 
critical operations activities. However, the key impact of Industry 4.0 is 
its ability to produce and access real-time information to allow increased 
visibility and to mitigate risks in the supply chain network (Telukdarie 
et al., 2018). The unstructured data generated from various sources, 
such as intelligent digital sensors (temperature, pressure, flow, weight, 
density and power utilisation in a manufacturing environment) con-
nected via wireless networks and mobile devices (from sales, procure-
ment, planning and control, stores team) with special applications, can 
generate a high volume of data which can then be analysed in a central 
control room to further extract key information for quality decision 
making. This can improve the accuracy of forecasts, supplying a greater 
degree of visibility, higher resource efficiency, asset utilisation, and 
improved throughput times (Telukdarie et al., 2018). 


Smart manufacturing uses systems based in Internet of Things (IoT) 
and artificial intelligence (AI) to plan machine loadings and vehicle 
routing, control production flows, and schedule deliveries and vehicle 
movements. According to !Colakovi"c and Had!ziali"c (2018), IoT-based 
applications enable a seamless integration of the virtual world with 
the physical world. IoT uses a combination of devices to produce data, 
send it to other devices and then further send it to the cloud. This data is 
useful when it comes to management decisions and data mining 
completed by business analysts who extract key information from data. 


Decision making is one function of data quality and stakeholder 
commitment that is important for data quality and analytics (Hazen 
et al., 2017). This is why big-data-based research is gaining importance 
as supply chains see an increasing complexity (Hazen et al., 2016). 
Hazen et al. (2014) suggested a method for scrutinizing and managing 
data quality in supply chain management, while Dubey et al. (2016) 
investigated the role of big data and analytics in enhancing sustainable 
manufacturing. In a recent study, Dubey et al. (2017a) stated that there 
is a positive relationship between big data and predictive analytics and 
social/environmental performance. Huge volumes of data are constantly 
being generated by business logistics operations (Wang et al., 2016). The 
critical information and knowledge gained from the shop floor/inbound 
logistics/outbound logistics can be used for new services and applica-
tions (Dev et al., 2019). Machine-to-machine communication systems 
are an advanced technology, which enables the exchange of wireless 
data between IoT equipment and the gateway. Further, with the use of 
the internet, data flows from the gateway to a remote repository in the 
control room (Montori et al., 2018). However, machine-to-machine 
communications in smart manufacturing have different traffic features 
and cause distinctive problems. Smart technologies such as advanced 
manufacturing systems (additive manufacturing), advanced process 
control, and advanced machine control are used to monitor and control 
smart production lines. The main focus of I4.0 technological enablement 
in manufacturing is the improvement of operational flexibility, opera-
tional efficiency and operational effectiveness in order to enhance 
operational performance (Karimi et al., 2007). 


Delic and Eyers (2020) suggested that additive manufacturing can 
improve supply chain flexibility and supply chain performance. Further, 


Lucianetti et al. (2018) suggested the prerequisites of application of 
advanced manufacturing tools. Raj et al. (2019) mentioned that coor-
dinated national level policy on I4.0 is essential for the diffusion of 
technological innovation. Without these policies, restricted applications 
may deprive firms from availing full benefits. It is clear that digital 
strategy and resources are essential for I4.0 applications. 


2.2. 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities 


The foundation of a circular economy is built on extending both 
manufacturer responsibility and the accountability of end users. In a 
circular economy, the resources stay in the system for a long time and 
provide maximum value, and then at the end of its life cycle, compo-
nents are recovered (Bag et al., 2020a). Developing advanced 
manufacturing capabilities requires research and developments (Ren 
et al., 2015; Chan et al., 2018). Advanced manufacturing using 10 
R-based approaches such as refuse, rethink, reduce, reuse, repair, 
refurbish, remanufacture, repurpose, recycle and recover can provide 
options for cleaner production and can help firms achieve a competitive 
edge over their competitors (Kirchherr et al., 2017). Digital technologies 
can be used to allay uncertainties in 10 R manufacturing operations. 
Durach et al. (2017) discussed contemporary 3D printing based pro-
duction steps and presented fifteen challenges. The advanced 
manufacturing technology of additive manufacturing and prototyping 
can help immensely in 10 R manufacturing operations (Hannibal and 
Knight, 2018). Mativenga et al. (2017) declared cost reduction to be an 
influential driver and sustainer for composite waste recycling in South 
Africa. Cost control can be enhanced by adopting Industry 4.0 and 
vertical and horizontal integration of the firm to allow a flow of infor-
mation. 10 R manufacturing is a relatively new concept, thus further 
research is required to shed light into this important area. The basic 
concept of 10 R principles is presented in Fig. 1. 


2.3. Sustainable development 


The member countries of United Nations (UN) in September 2015 
adopted the 2030 agenda for Sustainable Development (SD). SD focuses 
primarily on people, planet and prosperity. The 2030 agenda includes 
17 goals, 169 targets, and 231 indicators. Based on these global SD 
targets, each country is establishing their own targets on a national 
level. The vision for African Union is “Africa We Want”, which includes 
8 principles, later transformed into 7 goals of Agenda 2063) which is 
considered a vision-cum-action plan (Dlamini, 2015). South African 
manufacturers are aligning these 7 goals with business operational goals 
to enhance ecology, economy, and social equity (Mativenga et al., 
2017). 


Markley and Davis (2007) stated that, as the current sources of 
competitive advantages deplete, firms must focus increasingly on new 
sources of competitive advantage for sustainability. Carter and Rogers 
(2008) introduced the concept of sustainability, which is basically the 
integration of social and economic parameters to allow a firm’s 
long-term economic viability. Winter and Knemeyer (2013) stated that 
current literature lacks sustainability-related studies focusing on an in-
tegrated approach. Cultural and economic factors also greatly influence 
sustainability developments in any country (Roy and Goll, 2014). 


Therefore, identifying key sustainable supply chain drivers and un-
derstanding the inter-relationships among those drivers can be helpful 
for managers to use as a simple guide (Gimenez et al., 2012; Dubey et al., 
2015, 2017a) for integrating sustainability aspects in business opera-
tions. Supply chain transparency was found to enhance social and 
environmental parameters (Dubey et al., 2017b). Literature indicates 
that lean practices can help both directly and indirectly in achieving 
supply chain sustainability (Ruiz-Benitez et al., 2019). Firms are grad-
ually moving to a circular economy by applying recycling and rema-
nufacturing based principles (Bag et al., 2018a). Trust building is 
important to operate business in a sharing economy (Govindan et al., 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


































International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


4


2020). It is clear that without complying to SD goals, firms are likely to 
perish in this planet. Next, we present the theories used to conceptualise 
the research framework. 


2.4. Underpinning theories 


Conceptual research methodologies provide momentous enhance-
ments to a researcher’s ability to develop solid theories on operations 
management. The proposed theory may be a simple framework, but it 
must meet the Dubin’s five basic needs for a theory nonetheless, in that 
it: offers an improved understanding; is interesting; consists of variables 
and their relations; contains no composite variables; and contains the 
boundary criteria (Meredith, 1993). 


2.4.1. Practice Based View (PBV) 
The PBV perspective was proposed by Bromiley and Rau (2016). 


Having reviewed top Resource-Based View (RBV) papers, they contend 
that applying RBV in operations management research does not always 
help researchers align with their research objectives. 


RBV works on certain assumptions, such as those firms that are 
aiming to maximize profit margins and managers in firms that are 
strictly rational. Resource heterogeneity and resource immobility are 
two further assumptions in RBV (Barney and Arikan, 2001). 


Bromiley and Rau (2016) proposed that PBV was a better choice for 
operations management scholars to elucidate the total set of firm and 
unit performance on the basis of exchangeable practices. In PBV, the 
dependent variables are adoption or usage of particular practices and 
analysing midway or end performance results at a firm or a plant level or 
other business units. The explanatory variable in PBV is what creates the 
difference at a firm, plant level or other business unit. The underlying 
assumption in PBV is that firms demonstrate a large deviation in per-
formance within an industry; moreover, not every firm adopts every 
practice that may prove beneficial to them. As a result, the utilisation of 
practices can clarify performance deviation. The payback of individual 
practices may vary across an organisation as various moderators’ impact 
each and every practice. Thus, PBV can remove a number of problems 
linked with RBV. Similar to RBV, PBV is an umbrella concept under 
which a researcher may use alternate theories to present the primary 
concept that can clarify the specific impact on competitive advantage or 
performance, and which is triggered by individual firm characteristics. 


In the present research study, authors argue that I4.0 is an individual 
practice that may be used by individual firms to enhance 10 R advanced 
manufacturing capabilities. Furthermore, the research team considers 
the I4.0 delivery system a moderator that impacts the I4.0 practice and 


its outcome on the firm’s 10 R advanced manufacturing operations. 
Enhanced operational excellence means improved operational flexi-
bility, efficiency, and operational effectiveness which further determine 
the development of 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities to be able 
to run remanufacturing- and recycling-based production operations. 
I4.0 practices lead to the development of 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities, which is further supported using Dynamic capability view 
theory. 


2.4.2. Dynamic Capability View (DCV) 
Dynamic capability theory is used by previous researchers in oper-


ations management research, specifically for performing strategic 
choices under different business scenarios (Teece and Pisano, 1994; 
Teece et al., 1997; Barreto, 2010). 


Teece (2007) defined dynamic capabilities, stating that they “can be 
used firstly, to anticipate and mould opportunities and threats, secondly, to 
grab opportunities, and thirdly, to sustain competitiveness through improving, 
integrating, defending, and, fourthly, when required, reconfiguring the 
tangible and intangible assets of the firm”. 


Here, researchers argue that 10 R advanced manufacturing capa-
bilities are required to anticipate threats and to be able to make a stra-
tegic move before competitors, and also to be able to penetrate newer 
markets with remanufactured/recycled products at competitive pricing. 
The firm can reconfigure both tangible and intangible assets in 10 R 
advanced manufacturing activities as per business requirements. 


3. Research hypotheses 


The three research hypotheses are developed from the preceding 
discussion. 


3.1. Degree of I4.0 adoption and 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities 


International businesses practicing smart manufacturing focus 
mainly on three aspects to measure operational excellence: operational 
flexibility, operational efficiency, and operational effectiveness (Karimi 
et al., 2007). Smart production lines apply principles of flexible 
manufacturing systems that aid easy changeovers without having to 
wait a long time for an input (raw material/returned goods) and 
continue production of other products with available resources. This can 
save time and resources (energy, air, water), improve equipment and 
manpower utilisation, and significantly save costs. However, the main 
contribution of implementing such a flexible system is in regard to 


Fig. 1. 10 R principles (Source: Kirchherr et al., 2017; Potting et al., 2017).  


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


5


resource efficiency and resource savings (Kumar et al., 2015; Malik, 
2016). 


I4.0 implementation improves the process and product efficiency. 
I4.0-enabled technologies help to reuse the waste generated during the 
manufacturing stages. They can also help recover energy from scraps/ 
rejects and production wastages. These advanced technologies also 
optimise business processes and result in a lower percentage of scarce 
resource usage required in unit product manufacturing (Kolberg and 
Zühlke, 2015). 


Data integration in I4.0 systems provides increased visibility in the 
supply chain network (Xu et al., 2018). As technology advances, stock 
can become obsolete, thus smarter companies utilise I4.0 systems to 
avoid overstocking/understocking resources. I4.0 technological ena-
blement can be used to provide accurate sales forecasts and companies 
can then plan and schedule accordingly to meet customer requirements 
(Saucedo-Martínez et al., 2018). I4.0 automation can improve the 
quality of business operations in a volatile environment and thus allows 
smart manufacturing firms to develop their ability to successfully apply 
the 10 R manufacturing principles. This will provide a competitive edge 
to a manufacturer over its competitors (Chen et al., 2015; de Sousa 
Jabbour et al., 2018b). Therefore, we hypothesise: 


H1. Manufacturing companies which adopt I4.0 to a greater extent to 
apply front end and base technologies will demonstrate higher levels of 
10R manufacturing capabilities. 


3.2. Moderating effect of I4.0 delivery system on the path degree of I4.0 
implementation and 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities 


The I4.0 delivery system involves top management support, training 
resources, project resources, and the support of research institutes and 
universities (Bag et al., 2018b). Top management support in I4.0 pro-
jects ensures the success of projects. The interest of top management in 
the I4.0 project motivates juniors to participate more actively in projects 
and to manage it efficiently. Management reviews of I4.0 projects’ 
progress greatly help in achieving project goals (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 
2018a). Training resources are an integral part of the I4.0 delivery 
system. In-house and external training for employees are necessary to 
keep them abreast of the technological advancements and process 
changes in order to easily fit into the I4.0 structure. 


Similarly, project resources are important to drive the I4.0 delivery 
system. In successful projects, the I4.0 project team is headed by an 
experienced and capable project manager (Lasi et al., 2014). Secondly, a 
logical and realistic schedule for I4.0 implementation will generate 
better outcomes. Lastly, the application of appropriate project man-
agement tools and techniques while adopting I4.0 projects will provide a 
better operational output (Albers et al., 2016) which indicates that the 
level of I4.0 delivery systems influences their implementation. If the I4.0 
delivery system is not properly developed within the company, the full 
extent of I4.0 activation cannot be achieved, which will lower the ca-
pabilities of 10 R advanced manufacturing. Therefore, we hypothesise: 


H2. Manufacturing companies with a stronger (weaker) I4.0 delivery 
system have a greater (lower) level of 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities for a given level of I4.0 adoption. 


3.3. 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities and sustainable 
development 


The changeover to a circular economy needs advanced technological 
applications (Cecconet et al., 2017). I4.0 architecture can fit the tech-
nical requirements necessary to set up a sustainable smart 
manufacturing unit to run production lines using 10 R principles. The 
ability to build 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities can transform 
the traditional operations into a circular economy system. Globally 
every multi-national company is currently aiming for cleaner methods of 
production to achieve sustainable development goals (Fahy, 2002). 


Adopting 10 R principles in the production line will help to develop a 
closed loop supply chain and enhance the longevity of resources. This 
will help engineering companies to improve environmental quality and 
increase economic prosperity and social equity, thus aligning with sus-
tainable development goals (Zhang et al., 2018b). Therefore, we 
hypothesise: 


H3. 10R advanced manufacturing capabilities have a positive influ-
ence on sustainable development. 


4. Research methods 


The proposed method is based on empirical research design. 
Empirical is defined as knowledge gathered from real world observa-
tions or experiments (Flynn et al., 1990). Empirical research is field 
based research designed to collect data from naturally occurring events. 
Field data can be useful when building a baseline for a longitudinal 
study and for developing parameters and distributions for mathematical 
modelling and simulation studies. Empirical data is very useful for 
theory building and theory verification in the field of operations man-
agement. Empirical study in operations management research consists 
of five key steps (Flynn et al., 1990). The steps followed are depicted in 
Fig. 2. 


The first step deals with developing the theoretical foundation of the 
study. In this study PBV and DCV are used to develop the theoretical 
foundation of the research. The current study examines a research 
problem that involves theoretical verification. 


The second step involves the selection of a research design appro-
priate for both the research problem and the theoretical foundation of 
the study. The current study focuses on survey-based research design 
which is a commonly used method in operations management research. 


The third step is the selection of data collection methods which can 
involve one or more than one method. In the current study, a structured 
questionnaire is considered for the purpose of data collection. A large 
number of factors may bias survey-based research using questionnaires. 
Therefore, prior to commencing the survey it is important that the 
researcher design a reliable questionnaire consisting of valid constructs. 


The fourth step is the collection of data. Sample selection, ques-
tionnaire emailing, pilot survey, final survey, data cleaning and analysis 
of non-respondents are part of this step. 


The fifth step consists of the selection of an appropriate statistical 
tool for data analysis. The key focus in theory verification research is 
hypothesis testing that is within a specified level of confidence. In the 
current study WarpPLS software is used to perform hypothesis testing. 


4.1. Survey questionnaire 


South Africa is an emerging economy and is currently witnessing an 
increase in consumer demands and spending levels. This country has 
rich mineral resource reserves which attract foreign investors. South 
Africa has world-class facilities with an increased number of research 
and development activities taking place in the advancement of 
manufacturing and digitalization related areas (DTI report-Why invest 
in South Africa). 


The scales are adapted from previous studies such as the degree of 
I4.0 implementation consisting of three items which is adapted from 
Frank et al. (2019); I4.0 delivery systems consisting of four items are 
adapted from Karimi et al. (2007) and Sung (2018); 10 R advanced 
manufacturing capabilities consisting of ten items is adapted from 
Kirchherr et al. (2017); and Sustainable development consisting of three 
items is adapted from Kirchherr et al. (2017) (refer Table 1). Two control 
variables including age of the organisation and size of the organisation 
are considered in this study. Firm age indicates the operating years since 
the firm’s establishment. The firm age is controlled, bearing in mind the 
ability of old firms to develop capabilities and process information more 
easily than new firms. Old firms are equipped with better 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


6


information-collection and processing capability, therefore old firms 
achieve increased productivity performance in the dynamic business 
environment (Yu et al., 2018). Firm size can be measured by considering 
the number of workers employed at the firm. More workers are 
employed in larger firms. In large enterprises there is a larger avail-
ability of resource levels and capabilities (Gunasekaran et al., 2017). 


4.2. Sample selection and data quality checking 


The sample is selected using the convenience sampling method from 
the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS), South Africa 
database. For the measurement of the items, the research team used a 
Likert scale (5-point) and initially a pilot run was performed among forty 
executives to see the appropriateness of the scale. Four items related to 
sustainable development construct were dropped from the initial scale 
as they were indicated to be redundant and could create 


multicollinearity issues. The final survey was conducted by sending the 
Google form based questionnaire link online to 500 potential re-
spondents. CIPS database is considered for selecting the samples. In the 
end, 124 questionnaires are returned, indicating a reply rate of 24.80 
percent. In Table 2, the respondent details are presented which indicates 
that the highest responses were received from two sectors 
(Manufacturing/manufacturing-related services and automotive parts 
and associated producers) and, secondly, a large percentage of responses 
were received from persons working over thirty years in the industry. 


Further, an analysis is performed to discern the role of the respon-
dent in the organisation as well as the size (small, medium or large) of 
the organisation. In Table 3, the results of the analysis are presented, 
wherein it is shown that the greatest number of responses are received 
from Senior Vice President/Vice President level and, secondly, that the 
maximum responses are received from medium-sized organisations with 
300–500 employees. 


For this study, the research team gathered primary data which poses 
the risk of common method bias (CMB) (Podsakoff and Organ, 1986). 
However, a robust method of designing the instrument using multiple 
scales was used to minimize the effect across each type of construct. 
Further, the research team used a conservative version of Harman’s one 
factor test (Podsakoff et al., 2003) which depicted that one of the factors 
explained 35.93% of the variance and was below the suggested limit. 
This concludes that the data is free from CMB. 


Non-response bias (NRB) test is also performed. The first wave and 
the second wave are compared using SPSS software. The survey was 
started in the second week of Jan 2019 and the research team received 
forty responses during early February 2019. After performing one round 
of follow up; the research team received another eighty-four responses 
before the end of June 2019. The results of the comparison indicate 
there is statistically no significant difference between early and late 
respondents. It was also observed that there exists no significant dif-
ference between the profile of respondents and non-respondents. This 
confirms that the study is free from non-response bias (Armstrong and 
Overton, 1977). 


Table 4 provides the details related to model fit and quality indices 
such as APC, ARS, AARS and results indicate that they are statistically 
significant. AVIF and AFVIF values are satisfactory and indicate no 
threats related to multicollinearity (Kock, 2016). Finally, the research 
team checked the Tenenhaus GoF result which indicated large fit and 
that the model can be used for further analysis. 


5. Data analysis and findings 


Structural equation modelling is a group of multivariate data anal-
ysis that can be used to assess the complex relationship between latent 
variables and indicators. SEM using partial least squares method is used 
extensively in the field of operations management. Leading researchers 
in this area such as Wamba et al. (2017); Dubey et al. (2019a, 2019b) 
have used this PLS-SEM technique in their research work. In PLS-SEM 
analysis any latent variable can be measured through many indicators. 
Researchers need to look at the path coefficients and corresponding p 
values for assessing the links. PLS-SEM is used in this study because it 
has the ability to estimate hierarchical models by eliminating the 
vagueness of prohibited solutions through means of its flexible as-
sumptions (Hair et al., 2011). 


WarpPLS version 6.0 software is used to perform the path modelling. 
To verify the connections of the model, causality assessment indices are 
estimated, and the values are provided in Table 5. All values are above 
the acceptable level of 0.70. The reliability of the instrument is analysed 
using composite reliability as well as Cronbach’s alpha and Nunnally 
and Bernstein (1994) showcased that its value should be 0.70 or higher. 
The analysis in Table 6 showcases that the composite reliability and 
Cronbach’s alpha for all variables are above 0.70 and thus reflect a high 
level of instrument reliability. 


As per the suggestion of Fornell and Larcker (1981), the discriminant 


Fig. 2. Research steps (Source: Adapted from Flynn et al., 1990).  


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


7


validity is checked, and no abnormality related to association of 
construct with an incorrect variable was found. The results are presented 
in Table 7. The combined loadings and cross loadings are presented in 
Table 8. All of the standardised factor loadings were above a level of 
0.50 and significant at p < .001. 


In Fig. 3, the model after statistical testing is presented. 
The hypothesis testing results are provided in Table 9. All research 


hypotheses are supported based on the p values (all are below 0.05). 
This supports, firstly, the relationship between I4.0 and 10 R advance 
manufacturing capabilities and secondly, the direct relationships be-
tween 10 R advance manufacturing capabilities and sustainable devel-
opment. The moderating effect of I4.0 delivery system on the path I4.0 
and 10 R advance manufacturing capabilities is shown to be significant. 
Firm size and firm age are the control variables used in this study and 
neither of them showed any significant influence on 10 R advanced 
manufacturing capabilities. Firm size is controlled during the data 
sorting stage (no response is obtained from firms having less than 100 
employees). 


6. Discussion 


Globally, firms are focusing on developing sustainable production 
and consumption strategies to reduce their negative environmental and 
social impact. 10 R-based advanced manufacturing capabilities can be 
developed to manufacture products in an environmentally friendly 
manner. However, a lack of visibility increases uncertainty and even-
tually results in low supply chain responsiveness. This is one of the main 
setbacks for any 10 R-based advanced production line. Failing to accu-
rately estimate demand due to a poor sales forecast and lack of visibility 
in the supply lines impacts the production scheduling and machine 
loading parameters. This impacts the sales order dispatches and ulti-
mately increases customer dissatisfaction levels. A poor visibility of in-
ventory levels throughout the supply chain means it is difficult to 
estimate the volume of old goods/non-functional goods/components- 
related stock that may arrive at the focal firm’s warehouse at any point 
in time. Moreover, poor demand visibility leads to stock remaining 
stagnant for an extended period of time, thus blocking the working 
capital. Technology is changing rapidly and may even lead to obsoles-
cence of such stocks, which leads to a financial loss for the firm. The 
fourth industrial revolution has brought a digital revolution to the op-
erations management world. I4.0 technology enablement is used to 
apply front end technologies (smart manufacturing, smart supply chain, 
smart working and smart product) and base technologies (IoT, Cloud, 
Big data and Analytics) can provide a greater degree of visibility and 
enhance operational performance. The current study examined the 
extent of the effect I4.0 adoption has on 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities and sustainable development and, secondly, to study the 
moderating role of the I4.0 delivery system on the relationship between 
the degree of I4.0 implementation and 10 R advanced manufacturing 


capabilities. The research findings are summarized in a framework 
which indicates that firms with a high degree of I4.0 implementation 
lead to a positive development of 10 R advanced manufacturing capa-
bilities. Secondly, 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities are found 
to have a positive influence on sustainable development outcomes. 
Lastly, I4.0 delivery system is found to have a moderating effect on the 
relationship degree of I4.0 adoption and 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities. This suggests that firms should focus on the degree of I4.0 
adoption and 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities to enhance 
sustainable development outcomes and achieve their goals. However, 
serious focus on the development of infrastructure for I4.0 delivery 
systems is essential. This paper explores an emerging phenomenon and 
establishes new links which serve to enrich and advance literature in this 
area. 


6.1. Theoretical contributions 


The theoretical framework draws upon PBV and DCV Theory. The 
model is statistically tested considering samples from South African 
firms. WarpPLS software is used to perform PLS based structural equa-
tion modelling. The three research hypotheses are tested and found to be 
accepted in South African context. It is found that, firstly, firms with a 
high degree of I4.0 adoption that apply front end and base technologies 
will demonstrate a higher level of 10 R advanced manufacturing capa-
bilities; secondly, it can be seen that firms with more (less) I4.0 delivery 
systems have a greater (lower) level of 10 R advanced manufacturing 
capabilities for a given level of I4.0 adoption; thirdly, it is found that 10 
R advanced manufacturing capabilities have a positive influence on 
sustainable development. Therefore, I4.0 can enhance the operational 
performance in 10 R advanced manufacturing and improve the circular 
economy performance by achieving sustainable development goals. 
Firms must focus on PBV, implementing I4.0, and using DCV theory to 
build dynamic capabilities for running 10 R-based advanced 
manufacturing operations effectively. The data generated from wireless 
sensor networks must be collected, processed, and stored to ensure high 
quality decision making. 


PBV theory supports I4.0 as a unique method that may be used by 
individual firms to facilitate technological applications. Secondly, DCV 
theory supports the notion that 10 R advanced manufacturing capability 
is required to anticipate threats and be able to make a strategic move 
before competitors, as well as being able to penetrate newer markets 
with remanufactured/recycled products at competitive pricing. The firm 
can also reconfigure both tangible and intangible assets for 10 R 
advanced manufacturing processes in line with business requirements. 


6.2. Practical implications 


There are four key messages for managers. Firstly, managers should 
focus on implementing the I4.0 technologies all the way from the shop 


Fig. 3. Model obtained post statistical testing (Source: WarpPLS output).  


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






















International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


8


floor to the top floor level. Within a company, managers must apply I4.0 
technologies across the plant, divisional, and functional level. Secondly, 
careful attention must be paid to strengthening the I4.0 delivery sys-
tems. I4.0 delivery systems such as top management commitment, 
training resources, project resources and support of research institutes 
and universities play an instrumental role in I4.0 adoption. It is impor-
tant that appropriate project management tools and techniques are 
applied while undertaking I4.0 projects. This is made possible when 
experienced and capable project managers are leading the I4.0 project 
team. Such experienced team leaders need to design the I4.0 imple-
mentation schedule, which is logical and realistic. Skills development is 
required to fit the I4.0 system in the firm, which is made possible 
through collaborations between research institutes and universities in 
I4.0 projects generally facilitating skills development. 


The I4.0 delivery system must not be neglected by companies and 
must be embraced for strengthening the effect of the I4.0 delivery sys-
tem on 10 R manufacturing capabilities. Thirdly, managers must focus 
on using I4.0 technological enablement in building capabilities for 10 R 
advance manufacturing operations. I4.0 enablement will provide visi-
bility, flexibility and agility to enhance operational excellence in 10 R 
manufacturing. Finally, 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities must 
be used to efficiently utilise resources and to achieve a firm’s sustainable 
development targets. The resources will remain in the closed loop; thus, 
the life of the resources will be increased which is key to running circular 
economy operations. 


6.3. Policy implications 


I4.0 is like a great tectonic movement in the African continent. 
Disruptive I4.0 technologies such as artificial intelligence, big data, IoT 
and cloud computing have the potential to drive economic, societal and 
environmental changes. Africa’s education, health care and businesses 


have suffered tremendously in the past which has retarded the economic 
development to a great extent. Like South Africa, other African countries 
can equally exploit I4.0 to overcome developmental challenges. South 
Africa has aimed to fully harness the potential of advanced information 
and communication technologies by the year 2030 for economic growth. 
To create a holistic country level response strategy, South Africa has 
established a Presidential Commission on I4.0. This commission is 
working on resources, capabilities, policy and legislation among other 
areas related to I4.0. The focus is towards the creation of adaptive cul-
ture to this technological shift. The target is also the development of 
competitiveness at an international level relating to key sectors. The 
study provides insight which can be helpful when framing new policies 
in the era of the fourth industrial revolution. A clear policy is required to 
manage the ethical, legal, and safety issues surrounding the use of ro-
botic/automatic systems in parallel with human labours in 10 R based 
smart manufacturing environments. Policy must also be framed for the 
authorisation and control of robots/automatic systems in such smart 
factories. A policy on sustainability must be available to be able to target 
specific sustainable development goals. 


6.4. Research limitations and future research directions 


The sample size is small (124) and most responses are received from 
the manufacturing and automotive sectors. Secondly, samples for an 
empirical study are collected from an emerging economy, namely South 
Africa. Therefore, the results can only be generalised in context to 
emerging economies but cannot be generalised for developed nations. 
From an operations perspective, managing human resources to fit in the 
I4.0 setup is a large challenge for top management. Research studies 
must attempt to find solutions to such problems. Moreover, the role of AI 
in managing 10 R advanced manufacturing can also be studied for 
advancement of I4.0 and sustainability literature.  


Appendix A 


Table 1 
Operationalization of Constructs  


Construct Factors Items Adapted from 


Degree of I4.0 Implementation 
(DII) 


Global Scope All our plants located across different geographical regions have the capability to 
apply I4.0 front end technologies and base technologies 


Frank et al. 
(2019) 


Organisation Scope All divisions in our organisation have the capability to apply I4.0 front end 
technologies and base technologies 


Frank et al. 
(2019) 


Functional Scope Our organisation has capability to apply I4.0 front end technologies and base 
technologies at the functional level 


Frank et al. 
(2019) 


I4.0 Delivery System (IDS) Top Management Commitment Top management support in the I4.0 project is high Karimi et al. 
(2007) Top management shows a lot of interest in the I4.0 project 


Top management reviews I4.0 project progress on a regular basis 
Training Resources Time and resources are invested in training manpower for using I4.0 techniques Karimi et al. 


(2007) Internal users are provided with proper on the job training to apply I4.0 systems 
Training on I4.0 technology and processes are provided to employees 


Project Resources Appropriate project management tools and techniques are applied while adopting I4.0 
project 


Karimi et al. 
(2007) 


Experienced and capable project managers are in-charge of the I4.0 project team 
The I4.0 implementation schedule is logical and realistic 


Support of Research Institutes 
& Universities 


Local research institutes and universities provide sufficient support for developing I4.0 
infrastructure development 


Sung (2017) 


Collaboration between research institutes and universities in I4.0 projects generally 
facilitate skills development 
Collaboration between research institutes and universities for I4.0 projects will be 
useful for developing social relationships 


10 R Advanced Manufacturing 
capabilities (10 R) 


Refuse Our firm focuses on making product redundant by abandoning its function or by 
offering the same function with a radically different product 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Rethink Our firm focuses on making product use more intensive Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Reduce Our firm focuses on lower resource consumption and improving manufacturing 
efficiency 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


(continued on next page) 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


















International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


9


Table 1 (continued ) 
Construct Factors Items Adapted from 


Reuse Our firm promotes reuse by another consumer of discarded product which is still in 
good condition and fulfills its original function 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Repair Our firm does repair and maintenance of defective products, so it can be used with its 
original function 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Refurbish Our firm restores an old product and brings it up to date Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Remanufacture Our firm uses parts of discarded product in a new product with the same function Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Repurpose Our firm uses discarded product or its parts in a new product with a different function Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Recycle Our firm recycles for processing materials to obtain the same or lower quality Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Recover Our firm uses incineration of material for energy recovery Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Sustainable Development (SD) Environmental Quality CE capability enable the transition towards a low carbon economy Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


CE capability protect and/or restore the environment by focusing on environmental 
quality aspects and improving resource efficiency 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Economic Prosperity CE capability help to maintain, protect, transform and/or strengthen the economy Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


Social Equity CE capability protect, transform, strengthen and/or develop the society, human well- 
being and/or jobs 


Kirchherr et al. 
(2017) 


(Source: Own compilation)  


Table 2 
Respondent details  


Work Area Years of Work Experience 


<5 years 5–10 years 10–20 years 20–30 years >30 years Total 


Manufacturing/Manufacturing related services 1 4 7 14 16 42 
Automotive Component and Allied Manufacturers 1 3 1 7 22 34 
Petrochemical 0 0 0 1 10 11 
Mines and Quarries 0 0 0 0 5 5 
Mineral processing 0 0 0 0 6 6 
Heavy Engineering 0 0 4 19 2 25 
Electronic goods 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Education/Research 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 2 8 12 41 61 124 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


Table 3 
Role in the organisation and employee strength  


Role in the Organisation Number of Employees 


Less than 100 101–300 300–500 500–1000 More than 1000 Total 


Board Member 0 0 1 0 1 2 
CEO/President/Owner/Managing Director 0 0 0 1 1 2 
CFO/Treasurer/Controller 0 0 0 0 0 0 
CIO/Technology Director 0 0 0 0 2 2 
Chief Procurement Officer 0 0 2 3 6 11 
Senior VP/VP 0 0 75 0 2 77 
Head of business unit or department 0 1 0 1 5 7 
Manager 0 0 3 2 11 16 
Data Analyst 0 0 0 0 3 3 
Data Scientist 0 0 0 0 3 3 
Consultant 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Researcher 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Others 0 0 1 0 0 1 
Total 0 1 82 7 34 124 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


10


Table 4 
Model fit and quality indices  


Model fit and quality indices Results 


Average path coefficient (APC) 0.400 
Average R-squared (ARS) 0.563 
Average adjusted R-squared (AARS) 0.555 
Average block VIF (AVIF) 5.00 
Average full collinearity VIF (AFVIF) 3.98 
Tenenhaus GoF (GoF) 0.355 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


Table 5 
Causality assessment indices  


Causality assessment indices Results 


Sympson’s paradox ratio (SPR) 0.733 
R-squared contribution ratio (RSCR) 0.951 
Statistical suppression ratio (SSR) 0.700 
Nonlinear bivariate causality direction ratio (NLBCDR) 0.700 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


Table 6 
Latent variable coefficients  


Latent variable coefficients DII IDS 10 R SD FA IDS*DII 


R-squared   0.753 0.409   
Adj. R-squared   0.751 0.404   
Composite reliability 0.876 0.947 0.923 0.827 1.000 0.999 
Cronbach’s alpha 0.788 0.939 0.907 0.720 1.000 0.999 
Avg. Var. extrac. 0.703 0.600 0.546 0.545 1.000 0.975 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


Table 7 
Correlation among latent variable with square root of AVEs  


Correlations DII IDS 10 R SD FA IDS*DII 


DII (0.838)      
IDS 0.891 (0.774)     
10 R 0.776 0.799 (0.739)    
SD 0.707 0.750 0.600 (0.738)   
FA 0.503 0.498 0.422 0.370 (1.000)  
IDS*DII !0.845 !0.919 !0.836 !0.686 !0.454 (0.987) 


(Source: Own Compilation)  


Table 8 
Combined Loadings and Cross Loadings  


Loadings* DII IDS 10 R SD FA IDS*DII 


DII1 (0.858) 0.062 0.033 !0.040 !0.145 0.206 
DII2 (0.819) 0.109 !0.016 0.118 0.039 !0.010 
DII3 (0.837) !0.170 !0.019 !0.075 0.111 !0.202 
IDS1 !0.590 (0.785) 0.018 !0.016 0.150 0.090 
IDS2 0.540 (0.763) !0.045 0.016 !0.098 !0.159 
IDS3 !0.505 (0.784) !0.099 0.123 0.021 0.041 
IDS4 0.084 (0.758) 0.105 0.087 0.097 0.164 
IDS5 0.158 (0.772) !0.080 0.276 !0.163 0.073 
IDS6 !0.098 (0.766) !0.055 0.105 !0.036 !0.006 
IDS7 !0.039 (0.780) 0.042 !0.077 !0.002 !0.010 
IDS8 0.364 (0.745) !0.147 !0.072 !0.116 0.047 
IDS9 !0.355 (0.776) 0.227 0.138 !0.012 0.299 
IDS10 0.620 (0.791) !0.088 !0.283 !0.064 !0.246 
IDS11 !0.094 (0.772) 0.055 !0.045 0.167 !0.297 
IDS12 !0.058 (0.800) 0.063 !0.240 0.049 0.009 
10R1 0.491 !0.453 (0.673) !0.247 0.073 0.092 
10R2 0.153 0.045 (0.703) !0.310 0.262 0.256 
10R3 !0.144 0.508 (0.757) !0.188 !0.018 0.136 
10R4 !0.059 0.049 (0.706) 0.037 0.053 !0.453 
10R5 !0.564 0.240 (0.767) 0.155 !0.075 !0.036 
10R6 0.385 !0.137 (0.790) !0.091 !0.056 !0.210 


(continued on next page) 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


11


Table 8 (continued ) 
Loadings* DII IDS 10 R SD FA IDS*DII 


10R7 !0.254 !0.421 (0.774) 0.295 !0.123 0.043 
10R8 0.584 !0.513 (0.774) !0.243 !0.145 !0.128 
10R9 !0.113 0.460 (0.757) 0.279 !0.074 0.269 
10R10 !0.486 0.226 (0.676) 0.300 0.161 0.046 
SD1 !0.129 0.056 0.234 (0.777) 0.088 !0.041 
SD2 0.329 !0.469 !0.289 (0.744) 0.119 !0.357 
SD3 0.421 !0.128 !0.208 (0.670) !0.276 !0.049 
SD4 !0.564 0.517 0.228 (0.757) 0.037 0.436 
FA1 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 (1.000) 0.000 


(Source: Own compilation) 
*: p-value for all the items was <0.001.  


Table 9 
Hypothesis testing summary  


Hypothesis Beta and p 
value 


Findings 


H1: Manufacturing companies with high degree of I4.0 adoption to apply front end and base technologies will demonstrate higher level of 10 R 
advanced manufacturing capabilities 


β ¼ 0.55 p <
.01 


Supported 


H2: Manufacturing companies with more (less) I4.0 delivery system has a greater (lower) level of 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities for a given 
level of I4.0 adoption 


β ¼ 0.13 p ¼
.05 


Supported 


H3: 10 R advanced manufacturing capabilities have a positive impact on sustainable development β ¼ 0.64 p <
.01 


Supported 


(Source: Own Compilation) 


References 


Albers, A., Gladysz, B., Pinner, T., Butenko, V., Stürmlinger, T., 2016. Procedure for 
defining the system of objectives in the initial phase of an industry 4.0 project 
focusing on intelligent quality control systems. Procedia Cirp 52, 262–267. 


Amoako-Gyampah, K., Acquaah, M., 2008. Manufacturing strategy, competitive strategy 
and firm performance: an empirical study in a developing economy environment. 
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 111 (2), 575–592. 


Armstrong, J.S., Overton, T.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys. 
J. Market. Res. 396–402. 


Bag, S., Gupta, S., Foropon, C., 2018a. Examining the role of dynamic remanufacturing 
capability and supply chain resilience in the circular economy. Manag. Decis. 57 (4), 
863–885. 


Bag, S., Telukdarie, A., Pretorius, J.H.C., Gupta, S., 2018b. Industry 4.0 and supply chain 
sustainability: framework and future research directions. Benchmark Int. J. https:// 
doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-03-2018-0056 ahead of print.  


Bag, S., Wood, L.C., Mangla, S.K., Luthra, S., 2020a. Procurement 4.0 and its implications 
on business process performance in a circular economy. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 
152 (January), 104502. 


Bag, S., Wood, L.C., Xu, L., Dhamija, P., Kayikci, Y., 2020b. Big data analytics as an 
operational excellence approach to enhance sustainable supply chain performance. 
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 153 (February), 104559. 


Barreto, I., 2010. Dynamic capabilities: a review of past research and an agenda for the 
future. J. Manag. 36 (1), 256–280. 


Barney, J.B., Arikan, A.M., 2001. The Resource-Based View: Origins and Implications. 
Handbook of Strategic Management, p. 124188. 


Bell, J.E., Mollenkopf, D.A., Stolze, H.J., 2013. Natural resource scarcity and the closed- 
loop supply chain: a resource-advantage view. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 43 
(5/6), 351–379. 


Bromiley, P., Rau, D., 2016. Operations management and the resource based view: 
another view. J. Oper. Manag. 41, 95–106. 


Cant, M.C., Wiid, J.A., 2016. Internet-based ICT usage by South African SMEs: the 
barriers faced by SMEs. J. Appl. Bus. Res. 32 (6), 1877. 


Carter, C.R., Rogers, D.S., 2008. A framework of sustainable supply chain management: 
moving toward new theory. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38 (5), 360–387. 


Cecconet, D., Molognoni, D., Callegari, A., Capodaglio, A.G., 2017. Agro-food industry 
wastewater treatment with microbial fuel cells: energetic recovery issues. Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy 43 (1), 500–511. 


Chan, H.K., Griffin, J., Lim, J.J., Zeng, F., Chiu, A.S., 2018. The impact of 3D Printing 
Technology on the supply chain: manufacturing and legal perspectives. Int. J. Prod. 
Econ. 205 (November), 156–162. 


Chen, D., Heyer, S., Ibbotson, S., Salonitis, K., Steingrímsson, J.G., Thiede, S., 2015. 
Direct digital manufacturing: definition, evolution, and sustainability implications. 
J. Clean. Prod. 107 (November), 615–625. 


Chuks, M., Telukdarie, A., 2018. Decision-support for business process optimization 
modelling framework based on industry 4.0 enablement. In: Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management 
Paris, France. July 26-27 2018. http://www.ieomsociety. 
org/paris2018/papers/111.pdf on 20.3.19. 


!Colakovi"c, A., Had!ziali"c, M., 2018. Internet of Things (IoT): a review of enabling 
technologies, challenges, and open research issues. Comput. Network. 144 
(October), 17–39. 


Dalenogare, L.S., Benitez, G.B., Ayala, N.F., Frank, A.G., 2018. The expected contribution 
of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 204 
(October), 383–394. 


Delic, M., Eyers, D.R., 2020. The effect of additive manufacturing adoption on supply 
chain flexibility and performance: an empirical analysis from the automotive 
industry. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 228 (October), 107689. 


Deloitte, Industry 4.0 Is Africa ready for digital transformation? Retrieved from htt 
ps://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/manufacturing/za 
-Africa-industry-4.0-report-April14.pdf on 12.5.18. 


de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Jabbour, C.J.C., Foropon, C., Godinho Filho, M., 2018a. When 
titans meet–Can industry 4.0 revolutionise the environmentally-sustainable 
manufacturing wave? The role of critical success factors. Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change 132 (July), 18–25. 


de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Jabbour, C.J.C., Godinho Filho, M., Roubaud, D., 2018b. 
Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: a proposed research agenda and original 
roadmap for sustainable operations. Ann. Oper. Res. 270 (1-2), 273–286. 


de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Ndubisi, N.O., Seles, B.M.R.P., 2019. Sustainable development 
in Asian manufacturing SMEs: progress and directions. Int. J. Prod. Econ., 107567 


Dev, N.K., Shankar, R., Swami, S., 2019. Diffusion of green products in industry 4.0: 
reverse logistics issues during design of inventory and production planning system. 
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 107519.  


Dlamini, L., 2015. 2030 Agenda. http://www.un.org.za/sdgs/2030-agenda/on%2019.3. 
19. 


Dti report. Why invest in South Africa. https://www.thedti.gov.za/trade_investment/wh 
y_invest_insa.jsp on 19.2.19. 


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., 2019a. Big Data Analytics Capability in Supply 
Chain Agility. Management Decision. 


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., Blome, C., Papadopoulos, T., 2019b. Big data 
and predictive analytics and manufacturing performance: integrating institutional 
theory, resource-based view and big data culture. Br. J. Manag. 30 (2), 341–361. 


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z., Wamba, S.F., 
Roubaud, D., 2017a. Can big data and predictive analytics improve social and 
environmental sustainability?”. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 144 (July), 534–545. 


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z., Roubaud, D., 2017b. 
Upstream supply chain visibility and complexity effect on focal company’s 
sustainable performance: Indian manufacturers’ perspective. Ann. Oper. Res. 1–25. 
May 2017.  


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., Wamba, S.F., Papadopoulos, T., 2016. The 
impact of big data on world-class sustainable manufacturing. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Technol. 84 (1-4), 631–645. 


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Sushil, Singh, T., 2015. Building theory of sustainable 
manufacturing using total interpretive structural modelling. Int. J. Syst. Sci.: 
Operations & Logistics 2 (4), 231–247. 


Durach, C.F., Kurpjuweit, S., Wagner, S.M., 2017. The impact of additive manufacturing 
on supply chains. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 47 (10), 954–971. 


Fahy, J., 2002. A resource-based analysis of sustainable competitive advantage in a 
global environment. Int. Bus. Rev. 11 (1), 57–77. 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref4

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-03-2018-0056

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-03-2018-0056

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref16

http://www.ieomsociety.org/paris2018/papers/111.pdf%20on%2020.3.19

http://www.ieomsociety.org/paris2018/papers/111.pdf%20on%2020.3.19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref20

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/manufacturing/za-Africa-industry-4.0-report-April14

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/manufacturing/za-Africa-industry-4.0-report-April14

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/manufacturing/za-Africa-industry-4.0-report-April14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref25

http://www.un.org.za/sdgs/2030-agenda/on%2019.3.19

http://www.un.org.za/sdgs/2030-agenda/on%2019.3.19

https://www.thedti.gov.za/trade_investment/why_invest_insa.jsp%20on%2019.2.19

https://www.thedti.gov.za/trade_investment/why_invest_insa.jsp%20on%2019.2.19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref36




International Journal of Production Economics 231 (2021) 107844


12


Flynn, B.B., Sakakibara, S., Schroeder, R.G., Bates, K.A., Flynn, E.J., 1990. Empirical 
research methods in operations management. J. Oper. Manag. 9 (2), 250–284. 


Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable 
variables and measurement error. J. Market. Res. (February), 39–50. 


Frank, A.G., Dalenogare, L.S., Ayala, N.F., 2019. Industry 4.0 technologies: 
implementation patterns in manufacturing companies. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 210 
(April), 15–26. 


Gimenez, C., Sierra, V., Rodon, J., 2012. Sustainable operations: their impact on the 
triple bottom line. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (1), 149–159. 


Glas, A.H., Kleemann, F.C., 2016. The impact of industry 4.0 on procurement and supply 
management: a conceptual and qualitative analysis. International Journal of 
Business and Management Invention 5 (6), 55–66. 


Gould, O., Colwill, J., 2015. A framework for material flow assessment in manufacturing 
systems. Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering 32 (1), 55–66. 


Govindan, K., Shankar, K.M., Kannan, D., 2020. Achieving sustainable development 
goals through identifying and analyzing barriers to industrial sharing economy: a 
framework development. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 227 (September), 107575. 


Gunasekaran, A., Gallear, D., 2012. Special Issue on Sustainable development of 
manufacturing and services. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 1 (140), 1–6. 


Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S.F., Childe, S.J., Hazen, B., 
Akter, S., 2017. Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational 
performance. J. Bus. Res. 70 (January), 308–317. 


Hair, J.F., Ringle, C.M., Sarstedt, M., 2011. PLS-SEM: indeed a silver bullet. J. Market. 
Theor. Pract. 19 (2), 139–152. 


Hannibal, M., Knight, G., 2018. Additive manufacturing and the global factory: 
disruptive technologies and the location of international business. Int. Bus. Rev. 27 
(6), 1116–1127. 


Hazen, B.T., Boone, C.A., Ezell, J.D., Jones-Farmer, L.A., 2014. Data quality for data 
science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management: an 
introduction to the problem and suggestions for research and applications. Int. J. 
Prod. Econ. 154 (August), 72–80. 


Hazen, B.T., Skipper, J.B., Ezell, J.D., Boone, C.A., 2016. Big Data and predictive 
analytics for supply chain sustainability: a theory-driven research agenda. Comput. 
Ind. Eng. 101 (November), 592–598. 


Hazen, B.T., Mollenkopf, D.A., Wang, Y., 2017. Remanufacturing for the circular 
economy: an examination of consumer switching behaviour. Bus. Strat. Environ. 26 
(4), 451–464. 


Inderfurth, K., 2005. Impact of uncertainties on recovery behavior in a remanufacturing 
environment: a numerical analysis. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 35 (5), 
318–336. 


Jiang, Z., Zhou, T., Zhang, H., Wang, Y., Cao, H., Tian, G., 2016. Reliability and cost 
optimization for remanufacturing process planning. J. Clean. Prod. 135 (November), 
1602–1610. 


Karimi, J., Somers, T.M., Bhattacherjee, A., 2007. The role of information systems 
resources in ERP capability building and business process outcomes. J. Manag. Inf. 
Syst. 24 (2), 221–260. 


Kawai, N., Strange, R., Zucchella, A., 2018. Stakeholder pressures, EMS implementation, 
and green innovation in MNC overseas subsidiaries. Int. Bus. Rev. 27 (5), 933–946. 


Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M., 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: an 
analysis of 114 definitions. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127 (December), 221–232. 


Kolberg, D., Zühlke, D., 2015. Lean automation enabled by industry 4.0 technologies. 
IFAC-PapersOnLine 48 (3), 1870–1875. 


Kock, N., 2016. Hypothesis testing with confidence intervals and P values in PLS-SEM. 
Int. J. e-Collaboration 12 (3), 1–6. 


Kolk, A., Van Tulder, R., 2010. International business, corporate social responsibility and 
sustainable development. Int. Bus. Rev. 19 (2), 119–125. 


Kouedeu, A.F., Kenn"e, J.P., Dejax, P., Songmene, V., Polotski, V., 2014. Production 
planning of a failure-prone manufacturing/remanufacturing system with production- 
dependent failure rates. Appl. Math. 5 (10), 1557. 


Kumar, A., Baldea, M., Edgar, T.F., Ezekoye, O.A., 2015. Smart manufacturing approach 
for efficient operation of industrial steam-methane reformers. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
54 (16), 4360–4370. 


Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H.G., Feld, T., Hoffmann, M., 2014. Industry 4.0. Business & 
Information Systems Engineering 6 (4), 239–242. 


Law, K.M., Gunasekaran, A., 2012. Sustainability development in high-tech 
manufacturing firms in Hong Kong: motivators and readiness. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 137 
(1), 116–125. 


Lucianetti, L., Jabbour, C.J.C., Gunasekaran, A., Latan, H., 2018. Contingency factors and 
complementary effects of adopting advanced manufacturing tools and managerial 
practices: effects on organizational measurement systems and firms’ performance. 
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 200 (June), 318–328. 


Malik, J.A.N., 2016. US expects energy savings through smart manufacturing. MRS Bull. 
41 (1), 10–11. 


Markley, M.J., Davis, L., 2007. Exploring future competitive advantage through 
sustainable supply chains. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 37 (9), 763–774. 


Mativenga, P.T., Agwa-Ejon, J., Mbohwa, C., Shuaib, N.A., 2017. Circular economy 
ownership models: a view from South Africa industry. Procedia Manufacturing 8, 
284–291. 


Meredith, J., 1993. Theory building through conceptual methods. Int. J. Oper. Prod. 
Manag. 13 (5), 3–11. 


Moeuf, A., Pellerin, R., Lamouri, S., Tamayo-Giraldo, S., Barbaray, R., 2018. The 
industrial management of SMEs in the era of Industry 4.0. Int. J. Prod. Res. 56 (3), 
1118-113.  


Montori, F., Bedogni, L., Di Felice, M., Bononi, L., 2018. Machine-to-machine wireless 
communication technologies for the Internet of Things: taxonomy, comparison and 
open issues. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 50 (October), 56–81. 


Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I.H., 1994. The theory of measurement error”. Psychometric 
Theory 3, 209–247. 


Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method 
biases in behavioural research: a critical review of the literature and recommended 
remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88 (5), 879. 


Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.W., 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: problems 
and prospects. J. Manag. 12 (4), 531–544. 


Potting, J., Hekkert, M.P., Worrell, E., Hanemaaijer, A., 2017. Circular Economy: 
Measuring Innovation in the Product Chain (No. 2544. PBL Publishers. 


Prause, G., Atari, S., 2017. On Sustainable Production Networks for Industry 4.0. https:// 
doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2017.4.4(2. 


Pwc report, 2018. South Africa falling behind with digital transformation. https://www. 
pwc.co.za/en/press-room/south-africa-falling-behind-with-digital-transformation. 
html on 19.2.19. 


Raafat, F., 2002. A comprehensive bibliography on justification of advanced 
manufacturing systems. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 79 (3), 197–208. 


Raj, A., Dwivedi, G., Sharma, A., de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Rajak, S., 2019. Barriers to 
the adoption of industry 4.0 technologies in the manufacturing sector: an inter- 
country comparative perspective. Int. J. Prod. Econ. November, 107546.  


Ren, S., Eisingerich, A.B., Tsai, H.T., 2015. How do marketing, research and development 
capabilities, and degree of internationalization synergistically affect the innovation 
performance of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)? A panel data study of 
Chinese SMEs. Int. Bus. Rev. 24 (4), 642–651. 


Roy, A., Goll, I., 2014. Predictors of various facets of sustainability of nations: the role of 
cultural and economic factors. Int. Bus. Rev. 23 (5), 849–861. 


Ruiz-Benitez, R., L"opez, C., Real, J.C., 2019. Achieving sustainability through the Lean 
and resilient management of the supply chain abstract. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. 
Manag. 49 (2), 122–155. 


Saucedo-Martínez, J.A., P"erez-Lara, M., Marmolejo-Saucedo, J.A., Salais-Fierro, T.E., 
Vasant, P., 2018. Industry 4.0 framework for management and operations: a review. 
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing 9, 789–801. 


Sung, T.K., 2018. Industry 4.0: a korea perspective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 132 
(July), 40–45. 


Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., 1994. The dynamic capabilities of firms: an introduction. Ind. 
Corp. Change 3 (3), 537–556. 


Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. 
Strat. Manag. J. 18 (7), 509–533. 


Teece, D.J., 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of 
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strat. Manag. J. 28 (13), 1319–1350. 


Telukdarie, A., Buhulaiga, E., Bag, S., Gupta, S., Luo, Z., 2018. Industry 4.0 
implementation for multinationals. Process Saf. Environ. Protect. 118 (August), 
316–329. 


Tortorella, G.L., Vergara, A.M.C., Garza-Reyes, J.A., Sawhney, R., 2020. Organizational 
learning paths based upon industry 4.0 adoption: an empirical study with Brazilian 
manufacturers. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 219 (January), 284–294. 


Wamba, S.F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S.J.F., Dubey, R., Childe, S.J., 2017. Big 
data analytics and firm performance: effects of dynamic capabilities. J. Bus. Res. 70 
(January), 356–365. 


Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W., Papadopoulos, T., 2016. Big data analytics in 
logistics and supply chain management: certain investigations for research and 
applications. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 176 (June), 98–110. 


Winter, M., Knemeyer, A.M., 2013. Exploring the integration of sustainability and supply 
chain management: current state and opportunities for future inquiry. Int. J. Phys. 
Distrib. Logist. Manag. 43 (1), 18–38. 


Xu, L.D., Xu, E.L., Li, L., 2018. Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. Int. J. Prod. 
Res. 56 (8), 2941–2962. 


Yu, W., Ramanathan, R., Wang, X., Yang, J., 2018. Operations capability, productivity 
and business performance: the moderating effect of environmental dynamism. Ind. 
Manag. Data Syst. 118 (1), 126–143. 


Zhang, J., Chen, X., Fang, C., 2018a. Transmission of a supplier’s disruption risk along 
the supply chain: a further investigation of the Chinese automotive industry. Prod. 
Plann. Contr. 29 (9), 773–789. 


Zhang, Y., Yang, Z., Zhang, T., 2018b. Strategic resource decisions to enhance the 
performance of global engineering services. Int. Bus. Rev. 27 (3), 678–700. 


S. Bag et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref73

https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2017.4.4(2

https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2017.4.4(2

https://www.pwc.co.za/en/press-room/south-africa-falling-behind-with-digital-transformation.html%20on%2019.2.19

https://www.pwc.co.za/en/press-room/south-africa-falling-behind-with-digital-transformation.html%20on%2019.2.19

https://www.pwc.co.za/en/press-room/south-africa-falling-behind-with-digital-transformation.html%20on%2019.2.19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref86

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref86

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref91

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref96

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30210-3/sref96


