









Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles in digital supply chains: A framework
for integrating innovations towards sustainable value networks


Dimitrios Bechtsis a, c, *, Naoum Tsolakis b, Dimitrios Vlachos a, Jagjit Singh Srai b
a Laboratory of Statistics and Quantitative Analysis Methods, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, P.O. Box 461, 54 124, Thessaloniki, Greece
b Centre for International Manufacturing, Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of Engineering, School of Technology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, CB3 0FS, United Kingdom
c Department of Automation Engineering, School of Technological Applications, Alexander Technological Educational Institute (АΤЕІ) of Thessaloniki, P.O.
Box 141, 57 400, Sindos, Thessaloniki, Greece


a r t i c l e i n f o


Article history:
Received 14 October 2016
Received in revised form
1 November 2017
Accepted 21 January 2018
Available online 3 February 2018


Keywords:
Digital supply chains
Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles
Simulation software framework
Simulation tool
Innovation
Sustainability
Mobile industrial robots


a b s t r a c t


The principal objective of this research is to provide a framework that captures the main software ar-
chitecture elements for developing highly customised simulation tools that support the effective inte-
gration of Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles (IAVs) in sustainable supply networks, as an emerging field in
the operations management agenda. To that end, the study's contribution is fourfold including: (i) a
review of software simulation tools and platforms used in assessing the performance of IAVs interlinked
with sustainability ramifications in supply chain (SC) ecosystems, (ii) an integrated software framework
for monitoring and assessing the sustainability performance of SCs defined by the utilisation of inno-
vative IAVs in operations, (iii) a translation of the proposed SC framework into a corresponding software
application through a robust five-stage stepwise process, and (iv) a demonstration of the developed
software tool through its application on the case of an IAV system operating in a customisable warehouse
model. Our analysis highlights the flexibility resulting from a decentralised software management ar-
chitecture, thus enabling the dynamic reconfiguration of a SC network. In addition, the developed pilot
simulation tool can assist operations managers in capturing the operational needs of facilities and
assessing the performance of IAV systems while considering sustainability parameters.
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license


(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


1. Introduction


The Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm enables interconnection,
intercommunication and interaction among supply chain (SC) ac-
tors that allow for the dynamic management of global network
operations (Verdouw et al., 2016), hence promoting digital trans-
formations in a cradle-to-grave perspective (Bechtsis et al., 2017).
Nowadays, owing to the technological innovations, IAVs are char-
acterised by inherent business logic and the technical capability to
sense and autonomously interact with the surrounding environ-
ment in a manner that promotes reduced emissions, rational eco-
nomic expenditure and increased societal benefits such as
improved safety and accessibility (Koloz et al., 2013). To that end,


under the IoT umbrella, Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles (IAVs)
constitute a radical innovation that could assist in the efficient
management of production lines, handling of warehouse in-
ventories and supporting intra- and inter-logistics services in a
gamut of economic sectors including port container terminals
(Angeloudis and Bell, 2011; Carlo et al., 2014), agriculture (Reina
et al., 2015), healthcare (Kumar and Rahman, 2014) and industrial
manufacturing (Ferrara et al., 2014).


Notwithstanding the emerging popularity of IAVs, academic
research on the integration and sustainability assessment of
autonomous systems in a SC context is lacking (Schmidt et al.,
2015), while the extant literature only myopically refers to the
confined applicability of IAVs on specific network echelons (Gu
et al., 2010; Kumar and Rahman, 2014). The incorporation of IAVs
in a SC context to promote digital transformations is associated
with considerable capital requirements and technical challenges
(Browne et al., 2012). In this regard, the use of software simulation
tools to elaborate and proactively evaluate the operational


* Corresponding author. Laboratory of Statistics and Quantitative Analysis
Methods, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, P.O. Box 461, 54 124, Thessaloniki, Greece.


E-mail address: dimbec@autom.teithe.gr (D. Bechtsis).


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Journal of Cleaner Production


journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate/ jc lepro


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.173
0959-6526/© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71































http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

mailto:dimbec@autom.teithe.gr

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.173&domain=pdf

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09596526

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.173

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.173

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.173




performance and sustainability implications of IAVs for fostering
the establishment of bespoke SCs is necessitated (Black et al., 2016).
Simulation software tools provide the capability to make pro-
jections to the real world, assist SC actors in their decision-making
process, including sustainability considerations (e.g., resource ef-
ficiency, vehicle emissions), whilst also tackling system un-
certainties and complexities. These simulations can provide
valuable managerial insights prior to the deployment of autono-
mous operations across a digital SC (Zeng et al., 2016).


Despite the plethora of commercially available simulation soft-
ware tools enabling the analysis of manufacturing and distribution
operations, such off-the-shelf solutions often provide limited flex-
ibility in capturing customised working environments and corre-
sponding IAVs. Moreover, commercial software packages contain
built-in libraries that might be either outdated or limited in
terms of range of covered IAVs (Briggs et al., 2017). To that end,
considering the on-going innovations in the automations field,
simulating IAVs with commercial software is typically governed by
amagnitude of non-realistic assumptions. In particular, commercial
software simulation tools do not provide the capability to capture
an autonomous system's response to real-world environmental
dynamics (Tsolakis and Bechtsis, 2017). A typical example is the
impact of IAVs on operations and sustainability performance owing
to multiple reconfigurations in the facility layout over time.
Therefore, the understanding of the efficient use of IAVs in SC op-
erations, from a sustainability perspective, and the use of software
simulation to identify optimum deployment within a changing
manufacturing context is the principal objective of this paper. The
approach used builds on the established concepts of sustainability
and Intelligent Autonomous Systems in the strategic management
field (Mertens and Kanet, 1986; Seuring and Müller, 2008).


From both a theoretical and practice perspective, the study's
contribution is fourfold including: (i) a review of software simula-
tion tools and platforms used in assessing the performance of IAVs
interlinked with sustainability ramifications in a SC ecosystem, (ii)
an integrated software framework for monitoring and assessing the
sustainability performance of supply networks defined by the uti-
lisation of innovative IAVs in operations, (iii) a translation of the
proposed SC framework into a corresponding software application
through a robust five-stage stepwise process, and (iv) a demon-
stration of the developed software tool through its application on
the case of an IAV system operating in a customisable warehouse
model.


The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
the utilisation of IAVs in SC operations along with the associated
sustainability ramifications are analysed, while in Section 3 a re-
view of the available simulation software tools and platforms for
evaluating and managing IAVs is provided. In Section 4 a novel
framework proposes a software architecture for fostering the
integration of IAVs in a SC context. The framework enables the
sustainability performance assessment of customised supply net-
works that incorporate IAVs. Following, in Section 5 the applica-
bility of the proposed framework is demonstrated through the
actual development and application of a demonstration pilot
simulation software tool focusing, at this initial stage of our on-
going research, on the environmental sustainability dimension. In
Section 6 we provide simulation results on a conceptual warehouse
along with a discussion. In the final Section 7 we wrap-up with
conclusions and limitations while we further outline beyond state-
of-the-art research avenues for incorporating IAVs in a sustainable
SC context.


2. IAVs and sustainable supply networks in the digital era


The advent of digitalisation signals advances in industrial


information and enterprise systems that further instigate changes
in both the intra- and the inter-organisational boundaries that
every large, medium and small sized company has to realise in
order to compete in a globalised context (Xu, 2011). IAVs are
documented to foster the sustainability performance of SC systems
across the economic, environmental and social sustainability con-
stituents (Craig and Dale, 2008; Kannegiesser et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2017), including: (i) increased productivity levels (Negahban and
Smith, 2014), (ii) labour cost savings (Gosavi and Grasman, 2009),
(iii) lower energy consumption (Acciaro and Wilmsmeier, 2015),
(iv) reduced emissions (Geerlings and Van Duin, 2011), and (v)
enhanced workforce safety (Duffy et al., 2003). However, research
that motivates the integration of IAVs’ sustainability ramifications
onto the SC ecosystem is not sufficient. The aforementioned
observation is further supported by the S2C2 tool provided by
Bechtsis et al. (2017), a tool that evidently reveals opportunities for
facilitating the adoption of IAVs into SC design and planning
through identifying the key related decisions, as these are mapped
on the relevant strategic, tactical and operational levels of the
natural hierarchy. Opportunities can be identified basically on the
procurement and on the sales (last-mile logistics) tiers covering all
levels (i.e. strategic, tactical, operational and execution) as the
incorporation of IAVs is observed to be limited. In Subsection 2.1
and Subsection 2.2 we exemplify the role of IAVs in a digital SC
setting and we describe the key IAV-centric decision-making pa-
rameters that could impact SC sustainability.


2.1. Integrating IAVs in SC operations


By 2025 global economy is expected to serve a well-informed
population willing to compensate for personalised goods and ser-
vices (Ford and Despeisse, 2016). Indicatively, the European Com-
mission has set the Industrial Landscape Vision for the 2025-time
horizon to facilitate new production systems that will foster
innovation and competitiveness through analysing and prioritising
societal, technological, economic, environmental and policy drivers
(EU Science Hub, 2016). In this context, industries in Europe invest
in advanced manufacturing systems and sustainable production
methods enabled by information and communication digital
technologies (Scapolo et al., 2014). Enterprise information systems
are basically analysed at design, architecture, integration, interop-
erability and networking levels and enable the 3C triplet, i.e.
communication, cooperation, and collaboration, among SCs and
network actors through the use of standards and technological
innovations (Romero and Vernadat, 2016). Especially, standards
promote innovation and can be a useful instrument for crafting
policies towards shaping the industrial landscape of the future.


The term ‘Synchronised Production & Logistics’ is used to
describe the operational level integration of manufacturing and
logistics (including storage and transportation operations). Luo
et al. (2016) define ‘Synchronised Production & Logistics’ as:
“Synchronising the processing, moving and storing of raw material,
work-in-progress and finished product within one manufacturing unit
by high level information sharing and joint scheduling to achieve
synergic decision, execution and overall performance improvement”.
However, an opportune decision-making process is required that
could foster the effective adoption of automations towards
synchronised production and logistics systems (Bechtsis et al.,
2017). In particular, IAVs can be incorporated at all levels of an
end-to-end SC, although their adaptation to the manufacturing
shop floor tasks, (e.g., grasp, move, scan) and the warehouse facility
layouts is the prevalent trend.


Typically, IAVs are elaborated extensively at an operational level
and can greatly influence SC flows while promoting added value
and innovation within a digital SC ecosystem. Furthermore, to


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 61


































address the global SC challenges, all tiers of the supply network
should function in a coordinated manner. Overall, automations can
provide an integrated approach to an envisioned digital supply
system where all decisions are evaluated in a holistic and system-
atic manner as conceptually depicted in Fig. 1.


The identification of the appropriate IAVs in a customised
setting is a challenging task due to the complex nature of the
related SC operations under specific sustainability, functional and
budget constraints. To that end, simulation is suggested to be a
viable scientific approach to tackle the aforementioned issues
(Kavakeb et al., 2015), considering that this approach allows the
study of a system without provoking any disturbance (Demirci,
2003), and to further explore conceptual scenarios and evaluate
the associated impact in the real world (Yun and Choi, 1999).
Particularly, considering a SC as a complex system characterised by
data structures, operations, and product and information flows,
IAVs are expected to exhibit direct reactive action to each SC ech-
elon. To this effect, agent-based simulation could be used to pro-
actively represent the operation of IAV systems within a SC setting.
Generally, an agent is a software or hardware object able of per-
forming specific tasks autonomously (Farahvash and Boucher,
2004). Particularly, Weiss (1999) provides the following defini-
tion: “Agents are autonomous, computational entities that can be
viewed as perceiving their environment through sensors and acting
upon their environment through effectors”. Following that, sensors
and effectors can be either physical, i.e. field devices which are
represented by software files or data streams, or agents that can be:
(i) autonomous, (ii) interacting, (iii) intelligent, and (iv) flexible.
Therefore, multi-agent systems are recommended for simulating
IAVs cooperating to tackle operational challenges that are beyond
the capabilities or knowledge of each individual entity (Flores-


Mendez, 1999), especially within a sustainability context.


2.2. Leveraging IAVs for SC sustainability


Product and production life cycle must be aligned with sus-
tainable SC and manufacturing activities in order to get a system-
atic and holistic approach that supports the decision-making
process as: “Sustainable manufacturing satisfies the (societal) de-
mand for functionality while adhering to environmental, economic
and social targets over the entire life cycle of products and services”
(R€odger et al., 2016). However, the realisation of efficient and sus-
tainable SC operations through elaborating IAV systems denotes
that a systemic multi-criteria decision-making process has to be
considered in the relevant analysis tools (including simulation
software and specifically agent-based approaches). To this effect,
Bechtsis et al. (2017) provide a critical taxonomy of key decisions
for facilitating the adoption of IAVs for the design and planning of
sustainable SCs in the modern digitalisation era, while the related
decisions are further mapped on the strategic, tactical and opera-
tional levels of the natural hierarchy.


Firstly, at the economic dimension, the strategic decision-
making includes the determination of the capital requirements,
the appropriate selection of data sharing schemes for communi-
cation and coordinationwith the SC environment, the design of the
facility layout environment and the feasibility analysis. The deter-
mination of the exact vehicle type and fleet size along with the
economic key performance indicators can be either at strategic or
tactical levels, supporting the determination of maintenance costs
and the integration with the proper sensors (both for vehicles and
facility layouts). At the operational level, efficiency and perfor-
mancemust be taken into considerationwhile simultaneously fine-


Fig. 1. Integration of IAVs for devising digital SCs.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e7162


















tuning the navigation, routing, scheduling and dispatching algo-
rithms based on the economic key performance indicators.


Secondly, at the environmental constituent, strategic decision-
making focuses on the identification of the environmental goals
towards establishing energy management and control policies. The
determination of the required fuel type and the adoption of specific
environmental key performance indicators are referring to the
tactical level, along with the selection of the vehicles charging/
refuelling strategy and the adoption of specific tools for the envi-
ronmental assessment of the manufacturing plant. Following, at an
operational level, the monitoring of the environmental efficiency
performance on a daily basis along with the optimisation of the
routing, scheduling and dispatching algorithms based on environ-
mental criteria (e.g., minimisation of the total emissions) need to be
considered.


Finally, at the social dimension, the SCs' workforce safety and
accessibility, along with health and safety of the IAV operators, is
prevalent. In addition, emphasis is provided to the continuous
creation of skilled jobs, the constant improvement of ergonomics
for the workers at the tactical level, the identification of opportu-
nities for sensors' applicability to improve shop floor safety, and the
adoption of tools for monitoring and assessing potential hazards. At
an operational level, the fine-tuning of vehicles’ social implications
(i.e. accidents, hazards, noise level, ergonomics etc.) ensures the
social performance of the system.


3. Simulation software for IAVs: a critical categorisation


Developing sustainable supply networks embracing IAVs, whilst
considering the trade-offs among significant capital investments,
operational constraints and derived sustainability benefits, implies
that simulation approaches are needed in order to benchmark such
systems. Simulation, from the early 1970's till today, is a continu-
ously evolving field of research with undoubted contribution to the
progress of manufacturing systems (Mourtzis et al., 2014).


A vast number of software tools available for simulating IAV
operations are available, but their detailed technical analysis ex-
tends the scope of the present research study. In this section, we
rather provide a representative categorisation of selected software
applications that consider logistics operations in industrial
manufacturing settings, deriving from a review of the related
research publications. Generally, software tools and platforms used
for simulating IAV systems inmanufacturing and SC contexts can be
clustered into the following five categories (see Table 1):


1. Discrete-event simulation software,
2. Robotics software,


3. Multi-agent software,
4. Dedicated software for IAVs in intra-logistics, and
5. Object-oriented programming languages for complex industrial


systems.


Except for the abovementioned categories, traffic simulation
tools are widely used for replicating the kinematics of passenger
cars and urban logistics. Such tools can precisely simulate a vehi-
cle's movement and use a business logic layer for scheduling all the
necessary activities. Traffic simulation tools could be also used as
dedicated tools for the management of IAV systems for intra-
logistics operations in manufacturing plants. This categorisation is
not based on an exhaustive list of all existing software tools and
platforms, but rather acts as a synthesis of all major applications
that we have identified as part of our on-going research.


The introduction of IAVs into themanufacturing sector triggered
the development of associated simulation software. General pur-
pose discrete-event simulation software usually involves the cre-
ation of robust components (i.e. blocks that can be programmed to
perform specific actions) which can handle specific operations and
communicate with each other in order to develop the simulation
model. Moreover, general purpose discrete-event simulation soft-
ware packages are used to represent manufacturing and industrial
processes (Negahban and Smith, 2014), like for example: general
system design and facility layout, material handling, cellular
manufacturing, and flexible manufacturing system designs. Specific
add-on modules assure compatibility with every aspect of the
manufacturing activities, including intelligent intra-logistics vehi-
cles, while blocks with custom functionalities can be developed as
well.


In an industrial context, simulation software usually has 3D add-
on functionalities for precisely representing the movement of
machinery and other physical objects. In this regard, the emergent
robotics and automation sector motivates the development of so-
phisticated robotics control software that includes advanced 3D
graphics along with human-machine interface simulation tech-
niques (Bechtsis and Moisiadis et al., 2017). Robotics software de-
velops or incorporates modules for general purpose simulation
activities while focusing on the robotic systems (including IAVs) as
the main research activity.


In addition, multi-agent based techniques are prevailing in
recent years due to the decentralised nature of IAVs, the complex SC
environment with the multiple stakeholders and the mass cus-
tomisation schemes. Existing commercial and open source multi-
agent simulation software mainly refers to decentralised solu-
tions that are more flexible and robust through avoiding the exis-
tence of a single point of failure and overriding any kind of


Table 1
Categorisation of software tools and platforms used for simulating IAV systems in SC ecosystems.


Category Software and Platforms References


Discrete-event simulation software ARENA Ho and Liu (2006); Hsueh (2010); Jaoua et al. (2012); Rocha et al. (2010)
SIMIO Jain and Foley (2016); Pegden (2007)
Flexsim Kavakeb et al. (2015); Kesen and Baykoç (2007)
Promodel Leite et al. (2015); Lu and Wiens (2002)
PetriNets Hern"andez-Martínez et al. (2015); Meng (2010)
AutoMod Le-Anh and De Koster (2004); Moorthy et al. (2003)


Robotics software Webots-MATLAB Emmi et al. (2013); Ioannidis et al. (2011)
ROS - middleware Cþþ Myrsky et al. (2012); Vasijevi"c et al. (2016)


Multi-agent software AnyLogic Hao and Shen (2008); Leriche et al. (2015)
JADE Chen and Chen (2010); Ribeiro et al. (2015)


Dedicated vehicle control software packages for intra-logistics openTCS Eilers and Rossmann (2014)
Vendor Specific AGVE Group, Egemin, JBT Corporation and other


Object-oriented programming languages Cþþ Başak and Esra Albayrak (2015); Cimino et al. (2010); Gaskins and Tanchoco
(1989); Shah et al. (1997)


JAVA Martínez-Barber"a and Herrero-P"erez (2010); Michalos et al. (2016)


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 63










disturbances. Software tools in this category enable the develop-
ment of more flexible solutions in the context of mass custom-
isation that may not always be optimum.


Dedicated simulation software packages for IAVs and intra-
logistics take into consideration every aspect of a vehicle and
allow for a detailed consideration of vehicle parameters and kine-
matics, vehicle surrounding (i.e. working facility layout), network
parameters (communication with software modules and other
vehicles), and real-time interaction with the working environment.
It is worth mentioning some commercial autonomous vehicles
vendors with dedicated software for the management of an intra-
logistics vehicle fleet like for example the AGVE Group traffic con-
trol solution, the Egemin Transport Intelligent Control Center and
the JBT Corporations Self-Guided Vehicle Manager Software.


Finally, the use of general purpose object-oriented program-
ming languages is continuously increasing in intra-logistic services
due to the one-to-one correspondence between the physical ob-
jects and their digital representations. Every object is represented
by a discrete class and each class follows the object-oriented con-
cepts like encapsulation, abstraction, inheritance, polymorphism.
As a result, objects can be easily extended, diversified and reused,
while the maintenance requirement of the software significantly
decreases.


Overall, the use of simulation methods in manufacturing sectors
and SC management is continuously growing and they could assist
in the analysis of the expected sustainability impact of alternative
IAV systems. Nevertheless, the emerging need for more efficient
and customisable simulation techniques motivates the develop-
ment of hybrid methods integrating simulation methods with
agent-based simulation and artificial intelligence (Negahban and


Smith, 2014).


4. Proposed simulation framework


The proposed framework represents an inclusive simulation
software structure for the integration of IAVs onto the digital SC
ecosystem in a holistic and systematic manner. The framework is
divided into three tiers of abstraction following the general prin-
ciples of the ISA95 model of the non-profit community MESA
(Manufacturing Enterprise Solutions Association). Particularly, the
ISA95 model divides a classical production pyramid into: (i) busi-
ness planning and logistics, (ii) manufacturing enterprise system,
and (iii) control, and defines data structure and services at each
corresponding tier (Verdouw et al., 2010;Witsch and Vogel-Heuser,
2012).


Fig. 2 depicts a high-level representation of the proposed
simulation software framework. At the first tier, integration and
interoperability of system agents in the context of a digital SC
ecosystem is the main focus. At the second tier, the functional role
of IAV systems towards promoting innovations and sustainability in
digital SCs is more transparent. More specifically, the IAV entities
are the enablers for the mass customisation scheme by providing
the interface between the automation layer and manufacturing
information systems. The third tier is the bottom level of the
framework and is beyond the scope of the current research. In
particular, at the third tier of abstraction all manufacturing equip-
ment, from simple sensors and programmable logic controllers to
sophisticated manufacturing equipment (e.g., cranes, drilling ma-
chines etc.), are considered in order to ensure operationalised
interconnection, intercommunication and interaction with IAVs.


Fig. 2. High-level representation of simulation software framework for IAVs.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e7164






4.1. First tier of abstraction


The first tier of the proposed framework is based upon the
implementation of software agents for promoting collaboration
and negotiation among the high-level entities of a SC (Jiao et al.,
2006), supported by an added layer of integration with the SC's
information systems. Multiple agents register dynamically to the
network in order to seize resources (raw materials, work in prog-
ress, finished products), manage the flows (information, proced-
ures, cash, product) of the digital SC using the appropriate
communication and coordination protocols. Directory facilitator
agents can be used as a reliable source of information for the ex-
istence of ready to use agents and for keeping the agents' types and
skills.


Each agent possesses de facto knowledge about the real-world
environment and tries to enrich this knowledge by exchanging
information and negotiating with other agents. Software agents
organise the typical flowswhile updating their knowledge base and
the SC's information systems at every tier. Agent communication
and message exchange follow Extensible Markup Language (XML)
based ontologies in order to provide a clear context to all conver-
sations and follow specific standards. Furthermore, the framework
implements specific interfaces with enterprise resource planning
and manufacturing oriented information systems. The business to
Manufacturing Markup Language of the ISA95 model is an XML
based solution for ontology driven conversations that defines the
context of each message exchange (Cupek et al., 2016).


At the same time, IAVs provide feedback to the software agents
directly from the physical entities of the manufacturing environ-
ment. IAVs are considered highly critical entities for the system as
they enable the dynamic reconfiguration of the production life
cycle according to the market needs and can be considered as the
control unit that supervises the shop floor processes and data. To
this effect, IAV agents organise the intra-logistics, share informa-
tion and interact dynamically with the software agents in real-time.


The framework illustrated in Fig. 2 assumes that the IAV systems
implement the basic principles of a ready to use Cyber-Physical
System (Lee et al., 2016), characterised by: real-time smart
connection of the entities, conversion of data streams to informa-
tion, a flexible cyber level, a cognition level for decision-making,
and a dynamic reconfiguration level of the system. The detailed
description of the second tier of the framework is hidden at high
level interactions of the software agents as IAV agents provide the
production data to the first tier and establish a two-way real-time
communication with the shop floor.


4.2. Second tier of abstraction


The middle tier integrates the IAVs into the SC ecosystem and
seamlessly links the automation hierarchy levels. IAVs are among
the enablers of the Industry 4.0 revolution by acting on behalf of
market demand for end-to-end automation as they can be effective
and efficient through providing flexible manufacturing, prepara-
tion activities for production and logistics for supporting mass
customisation, overnight rearrangement of inventories, reporting
activities, and monitoring and calculation of key performance in-
dicators for the SC ecosystem. From an environmental and social
point of view, IAV systems result in minimised waste flows and
damaged products, enhanced energy optimisation, minimised
property damage and human errors, and further prevent loss of life
and fatalities in industrial manufacturing facilities. Below, we
specifically discuss the key role of communication standards and
the selected architectural backbone for the case of developing
bespoke simulation software tools that integrate innovations in
intelligent transportation systems, SC operations and sustainability


ramifications.


4.2.1. The role of communication standards
IAV systems are covering the field, control, process, plant


management and enterprise resource planning levels of the auto-
mation hierarchy (Monostori et al., 2016). In order to interoperate
with many multi-disciplinary tiers, the role of communication
standards is critical. Modelling techniques are necessary in order to
increase the replicability of the framework and decrease ambigu-
ities. Ontologies are creating the proper context for the entities,
their properties and the underlying processes (communication,
coordination and activities), enabling software tools to interpret
data in a more sophisticated way. Indicatively, the CORA ontology
and the underlying extensions proposed by Fiorini et al. (2015),
under the umbrella of IEEE Robotics and Automation Society,
describe an industrial environment with entities, their parts
(sensing, actuating, communication and processing), their re-
lationships and all the necessary variables. Modelling languages,
like the MES Modelling Language, integrate all the views for
describing manufacturing environments, the entities and the un-
derlying interdependencies (Witsch and Vogel-Heuser, 2012).
Especially, the MES Modelling Language allows for the capturing of
the technological structure of a plant, the specifications of the
production processes and the description of the functions and
manufacturing processes as to fully capture an industrial environ-
ment. In the same vein, general-purpose modelling languages, like
the OMG Systems Modelling Language (Hehenberger et al., 2016)
and the Unified Modelling Language (Matsuda et al., 2016), can be
used for the representation of Cyber-Physical Production Systems
in order to describe the entities of an industrial environment along
with their interconnection, functional requirements and
characteristics.


Moreover, representing industrial processes with international
standards leads to the automation of the sustainability assessment
activities and to more accurate measurement of the sustainability
impact of the production processes (Mani et al., 2013). IAV systems
and simulation techniques can automate the recording and
reporting of sustainability parameters, even at a product level, as
every parameter is an inherent entity characteristic that is included
in the entity's description. The proposed software framework
interface allows for the monitoring of SC sustainability parameters
in a bottom-up approach including the fuel consumption of the
IAVs, the greenhouse gas emissions, the energy requirements of the
manufacturing and storage equipment; hence, simulations support
the evaluation of effluents and the assessment of controlled refu-
elling approaches.


4.2.2. Architectural backbone
From a technical perspective, the proposed software framework


is based upon the Model View Control (MVC) approach. The MVC
framework consists of three independent layers (Gl€ockner and
Ludwig, 2013): (i) the Model layer that describes the entities and
their relationships, (ii) the View layer that provides the user
interface forepart and presents the current state of the model and
the output data, and (iii) the Control layer that dynamically alters
the model's state after receiving events from the user interface. The
MVC architecture depicted in Fig. 3 separates the user interface, the
business logic, the control structures and the data access methods,
and is recommended for modelling complex environments. The
business logic and the control policies can be easily modified in
order to highlight the role of innovations and sustainable
performance.


First, the Model layer uses entities to represent the physical
structure of a SC system, including: (i) resources (products,


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 65






production machinery, sensors, actuators, equipment parts), (ii)
facility layout nodes (input and output nodes, storage nodes, bar-
rier nodes, divider nodes, refuelling nodes, parking nodes, grid
nodes), and (iii) transporters (IAVs, conveyors, sensors, actuators,
load transfer units, trailers). Each entity corresponds to a specific
data scheme in order to extensively describe the properties of the
entity. The data scheme is part of a predefined ontology. Sustain-
ability parameters are enclosed in the ontology of the model in
order to precisely measure and report the sustainability impact at
each operations level.


Second, the View layer includes the user interface and the
reporting tools. Particularly, the reporting tools are incorporated
into our novel framework in order to enhance sustainability at all
network echelons. Indicatively, economic viability, environmental
impact and social implications that could be monitored with sen-
sors are documented through the reporting tools. Interoperability
to manufacturing and SC information systems can be established
with the use of interfaces that can interlink with third-party soft-
ware applications.


Third, the Control layer provides a plethora of algorithms for
localisation, navigation, collision and deadlock prevention, dis-
patching, routing, planning, and task scheduling, while taking into
consideration the entities' properties and the global optimisation
parameters. The algorithms determine the vehicles’ autonomy level
that has been the subject of the Autonomy Level for Unmanned
Vehicles framework (Huang et al., 2005). The Autonomy Level for
Unmanned Vehicles framework recognises fully autonomous,
semi-autonomous, tele-operated, remote controlled and auto-
mated robots (Fiorini et al., 2015). Sustainability focused optimi-
sations are included in the implementation of the planning,
scheduling and routing algorithms in order to minimise the sus-
tainability impact of a SC. The Control layer is responsible for the
characterisation of the system as hierarchical (central control) or
decentralised (distributed control).


The second tier of abstraction can describe an IAV system in
business terms and demonstrate its value at upper, middle and low
management activities. Upper management activities involve the
company's Business Logic and inform the Control layer (e.g., the
Decision Support System) with specific procedures and goals, while


the results are presented in the View layer (e.g., the Management
Information System), provide feedback to the board members and
conclude to strategic decisions for optimising the Business Logic.
The modeller can represent the physical hardware components as
simulation entities in the Model layer while the Control layer acts
as a middleware that enables communication with the modelling
elements of the Model layer. The Control layer interfaces lower
layer physical devices (facility layout nodes, resources like sensors,
actuators and equipment parts as well as transporters) using the
Model layer in order to coordinate their activities, enable their
cooperation in the manufacturing area and present the underlying
activities in the View layer. Low management decisions are usually
made at the Physical level and can leverage the output of the DSS
and the MIS where middle management activities prevail.


Following the key characteristics of the IoT, communication
between the aforesaid three layers is critical in order to ensure
operational excellence of IAVs and sustainable performance of
modern SCs within a digital context. Therefore, collaboration and
interoperation between the entities is handled by a middleware
layer, including exchanging of messages and coordination among
entities and activities. Data structures, information about the en-
tities and the resulting sustainable performance for any system
state (both historical and current state data) are stored in database
structures. To this effect, feedback mechanisms are necessary to
reconsider the operations of all entities and promote supply
network sustainability.


4.3. Third tier of abstraction


The third tier is beyond the scope of the current research as it
involves the functional details of the manufacturing and facility
layout equipment, resources, third-party equipment standards,
communication capabilities and interoperability issues of diversi-
fied devices. The second tier of the framework attributes each
distinct equipment node or resource node with an interface that
enables the input/output functions and the communication and
coordination of the devices with the third tier. Resources and
equipment with hardware and software interfaces enable the
proper execution of the framework functions without the complete


Business Logic


Physical Layer


Automation Hierarchy Pyramid
(Field, Control, Process, Plant, ERP)


Control Layer View Layer
Decision Support System (DSS) Management Information System (MIS)


Model Layer


Knowledge Base
Collision Detection
Information Retrieval
Dispatching
Planning
Scheduling
Routing


id
ERP)


Sustainability Reporting Tool
KPIs Reporting Tool


Connector to IT Systems
Information Exchange


User Interface


Entities: Resources
Load/Product node
Manufacturing node
Refueling node
Equipment parts


y
Entities: Nodes
Input and Output node
Storage/Barrier node
Parking node
Grid node


Entities: Transporters
IAV / Conveyor
Sensor/Actuator  part
Load Transfer part
Trailer part


Upper 
Management


Middle 
Management


Lower 
Management


Tier 2: IAVs Incorporation in Digital SCs


Fig. 3. Technical structure of tier 2 e The MCV architectural specifications.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e7166






knowledge of the third layer's individual components. Interfaces
are focusing on an input/output basis, omitting technical details
and functional requirements of third-party manufacturers' devices.


5. Demonstration of the pilot software simulation tool:
development and modelling


The application of bespoke simulation software for assessing
sustainability performance in SC operations is highlighted using a
custom developed tool as a case study. Our modelling approach
focuses on a decentralised multi-agent system for the control,
communication and coordination of all the involving entities
(Svensson and Danielsson, 2015). Design, control and integration
withmanufacturing environment through agent-based systems are
widely studied and all decisions are made in real-time (Mes et al.,
2008).


The developed simulation tool can model an IAV system oper-
ating at the second tier of the proposed software framework,
consisting of two major modules: (i) the basic model building
module for the modelling of the facility layout, and (ii) the vehicle
management module for realising the IAVs’ control layer and the
environmental sustainability reporting. Both modules are in the
pilot stage of development and are continuously being improved
and expanded to allow greater functionality. The programming
code for both the aforementioned modules was developed in the
Microsoft Visual C# 2010 development environment.


The basic model building module allows the representation of
the facility layout of aworking environment. Thereafter, following a
number of steps the user can simulate a number of specific fuel type
autonomous vehicles in a customised facility layout. The simulation
stepwise process, illustrated in Fig. 4, includes the following:


▪ Step #1 e ‘Create Grid Layer’. The pilot software's interface re-
sembles a grid with a menu for adjusting the parameters of the


model. The resolution of the grid layout could be adjusted in
order to better represent the physical world, capture the phys-
ical entities and enable a precise movement for the transporters.
Except for the basic menu functionalities (i.e. save etc.) the user
can select entities (barrier or divider entities, loads, trans-
porters, output gate) and insert them to a specific cell in the grid
layout.


▪ Step #2 e ‘Insert Map Layer’. The user can load the digital
drawing of a facility layout. This enables the immediate transfer
of the real world to the simulation environment, with the proper
scaling.


▪ Step #3 e ‘Insert Static Objects’. The user should use the basic
menu to insert manually the facility's entry point, the storage
separators, the loads (pallets with products), the refuelling
points and the output gate.


▪ Step #4 e ‘Insert Dynamic Objects’. At this stage, the user can
insert the number and the fuel type of the desired transporters
(autonomous vehicles), and select the preferred routing algo-
rithm to pick up and deliver the load to the exit point. The
research value of the algorithm is the ability to dynamically
calculate optimal routes based on obstacles present in the
layout. The user can then save the facility layout map along with
the selected static and dynamic objects.


▪ Step #5 e ‘Run Simulation, Assess the Model’. At this stage, the
user can run the simulation based on the defined entities and
view, in real-time, the environmental sustainability report and
status of each autonomous vehicle.


The vehicle management component's interface allows the real-
time reporting of the IAV's environmental sustainability perfor-
mance through indicating the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2),
carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), total hydrocarbon
(THC) and the total Global Warming Equivalent (CO2 eq). The lift
state is also dynamically presented as the vehicle operates in the


Fig. 4. Simulation tool: Model building module.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 67






facility layout, taking into consideration the loading and the
unloading kinematics of the vehicle and the type of the vehicle. At
the current stage of software development, the user can choose
between three distinct forklift types based on the used power
source (Fuc et al., 2016): (i) liquefied petroleum gas, (ii) diesel, and
(iii) electric. Both loaded (with 1t of load) and unloaded travel time
is taken into account for the measurements. It must be stated that
the transporters' movement towards the load and the output gate is
automatically triggered by the Control layer. The transporter fol-
lows the shortest path in the facility using the A star (A*) algorithm
in order to optimise the total distance travelled in the facility, while
avoiding the static and the dynamic entities.


6. Results and discussion


Existing research on IAVs in the SC domain is growing with in-
dustry needs pointing to more efficient and customisable simula-
tion techniques. Considering also that IAVs are associated with
significant capital requirements, simulation-based assessment of
productivity and operational cost of IAVs could optimise SC mate-
rial flows and thus justify a corresponding medium to long term
investment. In this context, the present research sets out the pro-
cess for the systematic development of simulation tools, from both
architectural and practical aspect, that can support digital trans-
formations in supply networks.


Firstly, the analysis of the reviewed software simulation tools
and platforms provides useful insights indicating that the devel-
opment of software for integrating IAVs in sustainable supply
chains should use a decentralised approach to comply with
emerging communication standards, while the developed software
tools must be hardware independent and should interoperable
with available third-party software applications.


Secondly, considering the findings of the software tools and
platforms' review and categorisation, we propose a framework
depicting an opportune software structure and key design ele-
ments for implementing interconnected IAVs across SC operations
to evaluate the expected network's sustainability performance. The
framework we propose is structured in a way that the analysis of
IAVs can be directed towards sustainability evaluation for a range of
facility layout designs, capacity scenarios, types of intelligent ve-
hicles and routing algorithms, in order to provide more sustainable
products, services and product-service combinations within the
digital economy landscape (Vezzoli et al., 2012). In this regard, a
software application could adapt to advances in environmental
regulations and support firms in considering regulations as en-
ablers for growth.


From a technical perspective, the proposed software framework
enables practitioners and academicians alike to integrate com-
mercial IAVs into the SC ecosystem by treating the vehicles' char-
acteristics as member variables at the simulation Model layer
(special features, capacity, velocity, acceleration etc.) through using
the appropriate entities that fit the vehicles' characteristics (sen-
sors, actuators, load transfer equipment, trailers etc.). The frame-
work further enables the vehicle's navigation as well as
dispatching, planning and scheduling activities at the Control layer
and allows the comparative analysis of the derived sustainability
performance in the View layer. Moreover, it is feasible to assess the
sustainability performance of the same IAV units in multiple facility
layouts by altering the shop floor entities at the Model layer of the
framework. Sustainability ramifications comprise the fundamental
basis of the proposed software framework as each entity at the
Model layer has properties that capture the environmental, eco-
nomic and social parameters. The Control layer embraces the ac-
tions that each entity can undertake considering that each action is
associated with specific and measurable sustainability impacts.


Sustainability reporting is inherent to the system and is automat-
ically and dynamically generated. Particularly, the framework
provisions the precise sustainability metrics for the entities, the
processing and the overall IAV kinematics. Although the proposed
framework could address demand volatility, the tier approach
separates low-level shop floor activities, high-level shop floor ac-
tivities and SC coordination. The agent-based approach provides
the system with decentralised management and enables the dy-
namic reconfiguration of the SC network and the shop floor. Agents
can dynamically register and unregister without disrupting the
stability of the system while IAVs can adjust the manufacturing
schedule by taking into consideration multi-optimisation
parameters.


Thirdly, the development of the demonstration pilot simulation
software sets out a five-stage stepwise process recommended for
the design of flexible tools that capture the characteristics of dy-
namic manufacturing contexts and support the effective integra-
tion of IAVs in operations. In this regard, at a first stage, a software
application primarily needs to have a clear interface that allows a
gamut of elements to be applied and imported. Following that, at a
second stage, importing the layout of an industrial environment
into the software should be simple and transparent to avoid chal-
lenges associated with advanced digital drawing skills. Importing
ready-to-use layout maps allows, at a third stage, the manual
insertion of static objects that represent the design specification
elements of a facility including barriers, walls, loads, charging/
parking stations, and input/output gates. This digital replication of
the industrial environment along with its specifications could, at a
fourth stage, inform about the available or required dynamic ob-
jects that define operations. More specifically, a simulation soft-
ware should be able to capture real-world shop floor entities along
with their properties, manufacturing machines, sensors, program-
mable logic controllers, actuators and finally the transport vehicles
with their specific characteristics, properties and capabilities. At
the last fifth stage, all entities have been recognised and captured in
a software environment to proceed with simulating alternative
scenarios and assessing IAVs’ operations efficiency and sustain-
ability performance.


In terms of demonstrating the applicability of the developed
software, we used the case of a customisable warehouse facility as a
simulation testbed. Table 2 summarises the simulated eco-
indicator results according to the specific fuel type of utilised
AGVs (Liquefied Petrol Gas - LPG, Diesel - DSL, Electric - ELE), taking
into consideration the cumulative loaded and unloaded travel
distances calculated in the presented model. Facility managers can
identify the operational needs of the facility while considering
environmental sustainability parameters.


7. Conclusions


This research sets out the process for the systematic design and
development of simulation software tools for integrating IAV sys-
tems in digital supply networks, further enabling the simulation
and sustainability assessment of the performed operations. The
applicability of the proposed framework is demonstrated through a
custom-built simulation software tool that is tested on the case of
an IAV system operating in a conceptual and highly customised
warehouse.


The pursuit of truly digital SCs and smart manufacturing sys-
tems exerts considerable pressure on the frontiers of automations
by emphasising the adoption of IAVs to promote workable re-
lationships among environmental performance, economic growth
and social benefits (Bechtsis et al., 2017). The transition from
traditional SCs to digital networks in a viablemanner that promotes
sustainability compels the utilisation, integration and coordination


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e7168






of IAVs across different levels of operations (Bechtsis et al., 2017).
Taking into consideration this perspective, the present study
initially provides a critical categorisation of software tools and
platforms used for simulating IAV systems in SC ecosystems. The
findings of the review indicate that the use of simulation methods
in industrial manufacturing and SC management sectors is
continuously growing while the incipient need for highly efficient
and customisable simulation techniques encourages the elabora-
tion of hybrid simulation methods combining agent-based simu-
lation with artificial intelligence (Negahban and Smith, 2014).


In this context, this paper contributes to sustainable SC research
by identifying a framework for the systematic development of
simulation software tools that combine environmental sustain-
ability performance with operational elements. In particular, the
presented software framework supports the process of simulating
and evaluating global supply networks through allowing for the
development of customised simulation tools dedicated to sustain-
able SCs defined by IAV platform technologies, while contempo-
rarily providing expanded applicability to all the abstraction layers
(bottom-up approach) for generating meaningful insights to real-
world scenarios. Furthermore, we test the proposed framework
by programming a corresponding simulation software tool, that is
highly customisable, and we further recommend a five-stage
stepwise process for developing software tools that support the
effective integration of IAVs in sustainable supply networks. We
finally test the developed software tool to the case of a custom-
isable industrial warehouse while we monitor the resulting eco-
indicators of the utilised IAV system.


In conducting this study, some limitations are evident which,
however, provide stimulating grounds for expanding our research
horizons. Firstly, the provided analysis framework was developed
using an extensive literature review and our narrow knowledge
over real-word working environments, while testing and refine-
ment was restricted to the application of the conceptual ware-
house's intra-logistics operations. In this sense, input from
academic experts and practitioners may provide greater insights
into the framework of integrating IAVs in digital SCs for promoting
sustainability, and would further facilitate generalisability of the
provided findings. Secondly, the bespoke software tool presented in
this study captures environmental sustainability performance
metrics, but does not quantify economic and/or social consider-
ations. On-going research programming work aims to extend the
tool's capabilities and provide greater flexibility and
customisability.


With respect to future scientific directions, we aim to demon-
strate the applicability of the proposed framework on real-world
settings, initially through the case of last-mile logistics operations
and specifically through the case of urban consolidation centres in
clinical trial and pharmaceutical supply networks. To date, the
extant literature on intelligent systems and simulation appears to
have a myopic focus on warehouse management operations,


meaning that the existing studies have largely not considered
diversified, yet coordinated, operations across a supply network.
This research could promote the development of a novel frame-
work that integrates IAVs in end-to-end operations so as to foster
sustainability performance and to ensure network competitiveness
(Ngai et al., 2014).


Acknowledgements


This research has received funding from the EPSRC Reference
No. EP/K02888X/1 e “Engineering Driven Sustainable Supply Net-
works - A UK/India Collaborative Study”. The authors would also
like to thank Mr. Dimitrios Katikaridis and Mr. Ioannis Menexes for
their contribution to the on-going development of the simulation
software tool.


References


Acciaro, M., Wilmsmeier, G., 2015. Energy efficiency in maritime logistics chains.
Res. Transport. Bus. Manag. 17, 1e7.


Angeloudis, P., Bell, M.G., 2011. A review of container terminal simulation models.
Marit. Pol. Manag. 38 (5), 523e540.


Başak, €O., Esra Albayrak, Y., 2015. Petri net based decision system modeling in real-
time scheduling and control of flexible automotive manufacturing systems.
Comput. Ind. Eng. 86, 116e126.


Bechtsis, D., Moisiadis, V., Tsolakis, N., Bochtis, D., Vlachos, D., 2017. Scheduling and
control of unmanned ground vehicles for precision farming: A real-time navi-
gation tool. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2017, pp. 180e187.


Bechtsis, D., Tsolakis, N., Vlachos, D., Iakovou, E., 2017. Sustainable supply chain
management in the digitalisation era: the impact of Automated Guided Vehi-
cles. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 3970e3984.


Black, M.J., Sadhukhan, J., Day, K., Drage, G., Murphy, R.J., 2016. Developing database
criteria for the assessment of biomass supply chains for biorefinery develop-
ment. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 107, 253e262.


Briggs, I., Murtagh, M., Kee, R., McCulloug, G., Douglas, R., 2017. Sustainable non-
automotive vehicles: the simulation challenges. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 68,
840e851.


Browne, D., O'Mahony, M., Caulfield, B., 2012. How should barriers to alternative
fuels and vehicles be classified and potential policies to promote innovative
technologies be evaluated? J. Clean. Prod. 35, 140e151.


Carlo, H.J., Vis, I.F.A., Roodbergen, K.J., 2014. Transport operations in container ter-
minals: literature overview, trends, research directions and classification
scheme. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 236 (1), 1e13.


Chen, K.-Y., Chen, C.-J., 2010. Applying multi-agent technique in multi-section
flexible manufacturing system. Expert Syst. Appl. 37, 7310e7318.


Cimino, A., Longo, F., Mirabelli, G., 2010. A general simulation framework for supply
chain modeling: state of the art and case study. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Issues 7 (2),
1e9.


Craig, R.C., Dale, S.R., 2008. A framework of sustainable supply chain management:
moving toward new theory. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38 (5), 360e387.


Cupek, R., Ziebinski, A., Huczala, L., Erdogan, H., 2016. Agent-based manufacturing
execution systems for short-series production scheduling. Comput. Ind. 82,
245e258.


Demirci, E., 2003. Simulation modelling and analysis of a port investment. Simu-
lation 79 (2), 94e105.


Duffy, V.G., Wu, F.F., Ng, P.P.W., 2003. Development of an Internet virtual layout
system for improving workplace safety. Comput. Ind. 50, 207e230.


Eilers, K., Rossmann, J., 2014. Modeling an AGV based facility logistics system to
measure and visualize performance availability in a VR environment. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference 2014. IEEE, Savanah, GA,
pp. 367e375.


Emmi, L., Paredes-Madrid, L., Ribeiro, A., Pajares, G., Gonzalez-de-Santos, P., 2013.


Table 2
Simulation reporting tool: Indicative environmental results for a simulation cycle.


Emissions Category Emissions Type Vehicle Type


LPG DSL ELE


Direct Emissions CO2 (g) 2.592.382,46 1.921.775,68 0,00
CO (g) 21.637,28 5.940,64 0,00
NOX (g) 17.699,18 18.202,98 0,00
THC (g) 2.447,70 1.513,74 0,00


Indirect Emissions Global Warming (kg) CO2 eq 3.130,70 1.978,14 682,58


Symbols: LPG for Liquefied Petrol Gas, DSL for Diesel, ELE for Electric.
Note: Results are calculated taken into consideration both loaded and unloaded travel time. The calculations assume that each vehicle carries 1t of load for each loaded km (Fuc
et al., 2016).


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 69















http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref16




Fleets of robots for precision agriculture: a simulation environment. Ind. Robot
Int. J. 40 (1), 41e58.


EU Science Hub, 2016. Industrial Landscape Vision 2025. Joint Research Centre,
European Commission, Brussels. Available at. https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/
research/foresight/ilv2025. (Accessed 25 October 2017).


Farahvash, P., Boucher, T.O., 2004. A multi-agent architecture for control of AGV
systems. Robot. Comput. Integrated Manuf. 20 (6), 473e483.


Ferrara, A., Gebennini, E., Grassi, A., 2014. Fleet sizing of laser guided vehicles and
pallet shuttles in automated warehouses. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 157, 7e14.


Fiorini, S.R., Carbonera, J.L., Gonçalves, P., Jorge, V.A.M., Rey, V.F., Haidegger, T.,
Abel, M., Redfield, S.A., Balakirsky, S., Ragavan, V., Li, H., Schlenoff, C., Prestes, E.,
2015. Extensions to the core ontology for robotics and automation. Robot.
Comput. Integrated Manuf. 33, 3e11.


Flores-Mendez, R.A., 1999. Towards a standardization of multi-agent system
framework. ACM Crossroads 5 (4), 18e24.


Ford, S., Despeisse, M., 2016. Additive manufacturing and sustainability: an
exploratory study of the advantages and challenges. J. Clean. Prod. 137,
1573e1587.


Fuc, P., Kurczewski, P., Lewandowska, A., Nowak, E., Selech, J., Ziolkowski, A., 2016.
An environmental life cycle assessment of forklift operation: a well-to-wheel
analysis. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 21 (10), 1438e1451.


Gaskins, R.J., Tanchoco, J.M.A., 1989. AGVSim2-a development tool for AGVS
controller design. Int. J. Prod. Res. 27 (6), 915e926.


Geerlings, H., Van Duin, R., 2011. A new method for assessing CO2-emissions from
container terminals: a promising approach applied in Rotterdam. J. Clean. Prod.
19, 657e666.


Gl€ockner, M., Ludwig, A., 2013. Towards a logistics service map. In: Blecker, T.,
Kersten, W., Ringle, C.M. (Eds.), Pioneering Solutions in Supply Chain Perfor-
mance Management. Josef Eul Verlag GmbH, Hamburg.


Gosavi, A., Grasman, S.E., 2009. Simulation-based optimization for determining AGV
capacity in a manufacturing system. In: Proceedings of the Institute of Indus-
trial Engineers Research Conference. Miami, FL, pp. 574e578.


Gu, J., Goetschalckx, M., McGinnis, L.F., 2010. Research on warehouse design and
performance evaluation: a comprehensive review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 203,
539e549.


Hao, Q., Shen, W., 2008. Implementing a hybrid simulation model for a Kanban-
based material handling system. Robot. Comput. Integrated Manuf. 24,
635e646.


Hehenberger, P., Vogel-Heuser, B., Bradley, D., Eynard, B., Tomiyama, T., Achiche, S.,
2016. Design, modelling, simulation and integration of cyber physical systems:
methods and applications. Comput. Ind. 82, 273e289.


Hern"andez-Martínez, E.G., Foyo-Vald"es, S.A., Puga-Velazquez, E.S., Meda
Campa~na, J.A., 2015. Motion coordination of AGV's in FMS using Petri Nets. IFAC
Pap. Online 48 (3), 187e192.


Ho, Y.-C., Liu, H.C., 2006. A simulation study on the performance of pickup-
dispatching rules for multiple-load AGVs. Comput. Ind. Eng. 51 (3), 445e463.


Hsueh, C.-F., 2010. A simulation study of a bi-directional load-exchangeable auto-
mated guided vehicle system. Comput. Ind. Eng. 58 (4), 594e601.


Huang, H.-M., Pavek, K., Novak, B., Albus, J., Messina, E., 2005. A Framework for
autonomy levels for unmanned systems (ALFUS). In: Procceedings of the
AUVSI's Unmanned Systems North America, Baltimore, MD.


Ioannidis, K., Sirakoulis, G.Ch., Andreadis, I., 2011. Cellural ants: a method to create
collision free trajectories for a cooperative robot team. Robot. Autonom. Syst.
59, 113e127.


Jain, S., Foley, W.J., 2016. Dispatching strategies for managing uncertainties in
automated manufacturing systems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 248, 328e341.


Jaoua, A., Riopel, D., Gamache, M., 2012. A simulation framework for real-time fleet
management in internal transport systems. Simulat. Model. Pract. Theor. 21 (1),
78e90.


Jiao, J.R., You, X., Kumar, A., 2006. An agent-based framework for collaborative
negotiation in the global manufacturing supply chain network. Robot. Comput.
Integrated Manuf. 22, 239e255.


Kannegiesser, M., Günther, H.-O., Autenrieb, N., 2015. The time-to-sustainability
optimization strategy for sustainable supply network design. J. Clean. Prod.
108 (Part A), 451e463.


Kavakeb, S., Nguyen, T.T., McGinley, K., Yang, Z., Jenkinson, I., Murray, R., 2015. Green
vehicle technology to enhance the performance of a European port: a simula-
tion model with a cost-benefit approach. Transport. Res. Part C. Emerg. Technol.
60, 169e188.


Kesen, S.E., Baykoç, €O.F., 2007. Simulation of automated guided vehicle (AGV) sys-
tems based on just-in-time (JIT) philosophy in a job-shop environment. Sim-
ulat. Model. Pract. Theor. 15 (3), 272e284.


Koloz, B., Grant-Muller, S., Djemame, K., 2013. Modelling uncertainty in the sus-
tainability of Intelligent Transport Systems for highways using probabilistic
data fusion. Environ. Model. Software 49, 78e97.


Kumar, A., Rahman, S., 2014. RFID-enabled process reengineering of closed-loop
supply chains in the healthcare industry of Singapore. J. Clean. Prod. 85,
382e394.


Le-Anh, T., de Koster, R.M.B.M., 2004. Multi-attribute Dispatching Rules for AGV
Systems with Many Vehicles. Erasmus Research Institute of Management. ERS-
2004-077-LIS.


Lee, J., Bagheri, B., Kao, H.-A., 2016. A Cyber-Physical Systems architecture for In-
dustry 4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manuf. Lett. 3, 18e23.


Leite, L.F.V., Esposito, R.M.A., Vieira, A.P., Lima, F., 2015. Simulation of a production
line with automated guided vehicle: a case study. Indepen. J. Manag. Prod. 6 (2),


269e285.
Leriche, D., Oudani, M., Cabani, A., Hoblos, G., Mouzna, J., Boukachour, J., El Hilali


Alaoui, A., 2015. Simulating new logistics system of Le Havre Port. IFAC Pap.
Online 48 (3), 418e423.


Lu, M.-S., Wiens, G.J., 2002. Predictive pull-based control of an unmanned
manufacturing cell, accounting for robot mobility. Robot. Comput. Integrated
Manuf. 18, 83e94.


Luo, H., Wang, K., Kong, X.T.R., Lu, S., Qu, T., 2016. Synchronized production and
logistics via ubiquitous computing technology. Robot. Comput. Integrated
Manuf. 45, 99e115.


Mani, M., Madan, J., Lee, J.H., Lyons, K.W., Gupta, S.K., 2013. Review on Sustainability
Characterization for Manufacturing Processes. National Institute of Standards
and Technology. NISTIR 7913.


Martínez-Barber"a, H., Herrero-P"erez, D., 2010. Programming multirobot applica-
tions using the ThinkingCap-II Java framework. Adv. Eng. Inf. 24 (1), 62e75.


Matsuda, M., Sudo, Y., Kimura, F., 2016. A multi-agent based construction of the
digital eco-factory for a printed-circuit assembly line. Procedia CIRP 41,
218e223.


Meng, X., 2010. Modeling of reconfigurable manufacturing systems based on
colored timed object-oriented Petri nets. J. Manuf. Syst. 29 (2e3), 81e90.


Mertens, P., Kanet, J.J., 1986. Expert systems in production management: an
assessment. J. Oper. Manag. 6 (3e4), 393e404.


Mes, M., van der Heijden, M., van Hillegersberg, J., 2008. Design choices for agent-
based control of AGVs in the dough making process. Decis. Support Syst. 44,
983e999.


Michalos, G., Sipsas, P., Makris, S., Chryssolouris, G., 2016. Decision making logic for
flexible assembly lines reconfiguration. Robot. Comput. Integrated Manuf. 37,
233e250.


Monostori, L., K"ad"ar, B., Bauernhansl, T., Kondoh, S., Kumara, S., Reinhart, G.,
Sauer, O., Schuh, G., Sihn, W., Ueda, K., 2016. Cyber-physical systems in
manufacturing. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 65 (2), 621e641.


Moorthy, R.L., Hock-Guan, W., Wing-Cheong, N., Chung-Piaw, T., 2003. Cyclic
deadlock prediction and avoidance for zone-controlled AGV system. Int. J. Prod.
Econ. 83 (3), 309e324.


Mourtzis, D., Doukas, M., Bernidaki, D., 2014. Simulation in manufacturing: review
and challenges. Procedia CIRP 25, 213e229.


Myrsky, M., Maula, A., Saarinen, J., 2012. Interface for controlling a fleet of generic
machines. IFAC Proc. 45 (28), 60e65.


Negahban, A., Smith, J.S., 2014. Simulation for manufacturing system design and
operation: literature review and analysis. J. Manuf. Syst. 33 (2), 241e261.


Ngai, E.W.T., Peng, S., Alexander, P., Moon, K.K.L., 2014. Decision support and
intelligent systems in the textile and apparel supply chain: an academic review
of research articles. Expert Syst. Appl. 41 (1), 81e91.


Pegden, C.D., 2007. Simio: a new simulation system based on intelligent objects. In:
IEEE Proceedings of the 2007 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 2293e2300.


Reina, G., Milella, A., Rouveure, R., Nielsen, M., Wors, t R., Blas, M.R., 2015. Ambient
awareness for agricultural robotic vehicles. Biosyst. Eng. 1e19.


Ribeiro, L., Rocha, A., Veiga, A., Barata, J., 2015. Collaborative routing of products
using a self-organizing mechatronic agent framework - a simulation study.
Comput. Ind. 68, 27e39.


Rocha, L.F., Moreira, A.P., Azevedo, A., 2010. Flexible internal logistics based on AGV
system's: a case study. IFAC Proc. 43 (17), 248e255.


R€odger, J.M., Bey, N., Alting, L., 2016. The Sustainability Cone - a holistic framework
to integrate sustainability thinking into manufacturing. CIRP Ann. Manuf.
Technol. 65, 1e4.


Romero, D., Vernadat, F., 2016. Enterprise information systems state of the art: Past,
present and future trends. Comput. Ind. 79, 3e13.


Scapolo, F., Churchill, P., Blind, K., 2014. Foresight as a Support to European Inno-
vation and Industrial Policy: the Example of Standards. European Commission
DG Joint Research Centre and Fraunhofer FOKUS. FTA 2014 Brussels, 27e28
November 2014 Session Industrial Transformation.


Schmidt, J., Meyer-Barlag, C., Eisel, M., Kolbe, L.M., Appelrath, H.-J., 2015. Using
battery-electric AGVs in container terminals - assessing the potential and
optimizing the economic viability. Res. Transport. Bus. Manag. 17, 99e111.


Seuring, S., Müller, M., 2008. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. J. Clean. Prod. 16 (15), 1699e1710.


Shah, M., Lin, L., Nagi, R., 1997. A production order-driven AGV control model with
object-oriented implementation. Comput. Integrat. Manuf. Syst. 10 (1), 35e48.


Svensson, B., Danielsson, F., 2015. P-SOP e a multi-agent based control approach for
flexible and robust manufacturing. Robot. Comput. Integrated Manuf. 36,
109e118.


Tsolakis, N., Bechtsis, D., 2017. Design of operations in digital supply chains: from
simulation modelling to real-world Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 21st Cambridge International Manufacturing Symposium:
Globalisation 2.0-Rethinking Supply Chains in the New Technological and Po-
litical Landscape. Institute for Manufacturing, University of Cambridge, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom, September, pp. 28e29.


Vasiljevi"c, G., Mikli"c, D., Draganjac, I., Kova"ci"c, Z., Lista, P., 2016. High-accuracy
vehicle localization for autonomous warehousing. Robot. Comput. Integrated
Manuf. 42, 1e16.


Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., Trienekens, J.H., Verwaart, T., 2010. Towards dynamic
reference information models: readiness for ICT mass customization. Comput.
Ind. 61 (9), 833e844.


Verdouw, C.N., Wolfert, J., Beulens, A.J.M., Rialland, A., 2016. Virtualization of food
supply chains with the internet of things. J. Food Eng. 176, 128e136.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e7170



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref16

https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research/foresight/ilv2025

https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research/foresight/ilv2025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref26

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref77




Vezzoli, C., Ceschin, F., Diehl, J.C., Kohtala, C., 2012. Why have ‘Sustainable Product-
Service Systems’ not been widely implemented? Meeting new design challenges
to achieve societal sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 35, 288e290.


Weiss, G., 1999. Multiagent Systems: a Modern Approach to Distributed Modern
Approach to Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge MA. The MIT Press, United States.


Witsch, M., Vogel-Heuser, B., 2012. Towards a formal specification framework for
manufacturing execution systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 8 (2), 311e320.


Wu, H., Lv, K., Liang, L., Hu, H., 2017. Measuring performance of sustainable
manufacturing with recyclable wastes: a Case from China's iron and steel


industry. Omega 66 (Part A), 38e47.
Xu, L.D., 2011. Enterprise systems: state-of-the-Art and future trends. IEEE Trans.


Ind. Inf. 7 (4), 630e640.
Yun, W.Y., Choi, Y.S., 1999. A simulation model for container-terminal operation


analysis using an object-oriented approach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 59 (1), 221e230.
Zeng, X.T., Huang, G.H., Chen, H.L., Li, Y.P., Kong, X.M., Fan, Y.R., 2016. A simulation-


based water-environment management model for regional sustainability in
compound wetland ecosystem under multiple uncertainties. Ecol. Model. 334,
60e77.


D. Bechtsis et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 60e71 71



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0959-6526(18)30195-1/sref84


