









R E S E A R CH A R T I C L E


Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: A literature review and
recommendations for future research


Usama Awan1 | Robert Sroufe2 | Muhammad Shahbaz3


1Industrial Engineering and Management,
Lappeenrant-Lathi University of Technology,
Lappeenranta, Finland
2Donahue Graduate School of Business,
Duquesne University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA
3Center for Energy and Environmental Policy
Research, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China


Correspondence
Dr. Robert Sroufe, Donahue Graduate School
of Business, Duquesne University,
820 Rockwell Hall, 600 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Email: sroufer@duq.edu


Abstract


Research regarding the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) and the circular


economy has gained traction since 2014. Paralleling the growth in the internet of


things (IoT), the circular economy poses both risks and opportunities to various


stakeholders in its development. This literature review aims to identify Industry 4.0


stakeholders' interests and expectations regarding how the IoT can be part of circular


economy management. Contributions include identifying various IoT tools for


dealing with circular economy challenges while also addressing implementation best


practices. The transition of the circular economy within Industry 4.0 requires a better


understanding of government, suppliers, international organizational interests, and


expectations regarding the IoT. This study enables future research on circular econ-


omy practices and their potential sustainability benefits for manufacturing firms. This


study's findings allow practitioners and researchers to understand the literature and


critical elements of the transition toward a more circular economy.


K E YWORD S


circular economy, Industry 4.0, internet of things, manufacturing firms, recycling, reuse,
stakeholders


1 | INTRODUCTION


The Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) is the ongoing automa-


tion of traditional manufacturing and industrial practices using modern


smart technology (Moore, 2019). The integration of machine-


to-machine communication and the internet of things (IoT) help to


increase automation and improve communication and self-monitoring


and the development of smart machines that can analyze and


diagnose potential issues. Industry 4.0, when combined with the


circular economy, represents two industrial paradigms enabling new


natural resource strategies (Rosa, Sassanelli, Urbinati, Chiaroni, &


Terzi, 2020). In turn, the circular economy is driving more attention


(Centobelli, Cerchione, Chiaroni, Del Vecchio, & Urbinati, 2020) in


support of innovative life cycle management, communication, and the


development of smarter systems reconceptualizing waste as intrinsi-


cally valuable (Perey, Benn, Agarwal, & Edwards, 2018). This industrial


revolution relies on digital technologies such as wireless connectivity


and sensors connected everything to everyone to gather data to


analyze, visualize the entire production system, and provide applicable


information to the business system (Wang, Wan, Zhang, Li, &


Zhang, 2016). According to Rüßmann et al. (2015), Industry 4.0 is a


combination of different technologies as additive manufacturing,


simulation, autonomous robots and vehicles, augmented and virtual


reality, IoT, cloud, and cyber security.


Studies of Industry 4.0 appear in a broad range of fields with


great potential to reduce impacts on the environment (Reinhard,


Jesper, & Stefan, 2016). Whereas some see Industry 4.0 primarily as a


means of protecting the environment, others see it as an opportunity


to reducing risk and improving productivity (Stock & Seliger, 2016). In


this study, we argue that these views reflect the supportive aspects of


IoT. Industry 4.0 provides opportunities to help address circular econ-


omy problems. For example, IoT is used in many industries to reuse,


recycle, and repair items, allowing the circular economy to develop


faster (Valerio, 2017). For this study, the circular economy is an eco-


nomic system based on reuse, reduction, recycling, and extraction of


materials from end-of-life products to accomplish long-term


Received: 23 June 2020 Revised: 16 December 2020 Accepted: 1 January 2021


DOI: 10.1002/bse.2731


Bus Strat Env. 2021;1–23. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bse © 2021 ERP Environment and John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1



mailto:sroufer@duq.edu













http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bse

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1002%2Fbse.2731&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2021-01-12




sustainable development goals (Kirchherr, Reike, & Hekkert, 2017). In


this way, sustaining a circular economy happens when creating a


restorative and regenerative system by design. This design keeps


products, components, and materials in closed-loop systems delivering


positive impacts on society while reducing negative impacts on the


environment (MacArthur, 2013).


Industry 4.0 and the circular economy have sustained rapid


growth over the last few years and represent one of our current digi-


tal era's essential themes. Much work in this domain has focused on


studying the link between Industry 4.0 and productivity (see,


e.g., Buer, Strandhagen, & Chan, 2018) along with challenges to


implementing a circular economy (Rajput & Singh, 2019b). Some


scholars have started putting Industry 4.0 at the forefront of their


research agenda (de Sousa Jabbour, Jabbour, Godinho Filho, &


Roubaud, 2018; Rajput & Singh, 2019a). Prior studies on the circular


economy have explicitly focused on exploring Industry 4.0 technolo-


gies implementation (Luiz Mattos Nascimento et al., 2018). The circu-


lar economy interface and digital technologies have recently emerged


as an area of focus (Okorie et al., 2018). Here, we agree with prior


research noting the importance of the IoT to a circular economy


(Bressanelli, Adrodegari, Perona, & Saccani, 2018).


There is a rich literature on Industry 4.0 and circular economy,


particularly in the manufacturing industry, which has improved our


understanding of the capacity of the IoT in the circular economy


(Nobre & Tavares, 2017; Okorie et al., 2018). However, this litera-


ture's primary focus has been on explaining IoT benefits on circular


economy initiatives. We see a gap in the literature explaining stake-


holder interests and expectations when implementing and developing


infrastructure (Bakker, Maat, & van Wee, 2014). To this end, there is a


lack of research examining the interest and expectations of multi-


stakeholders when attempting to implement circular economy initia-


tives from an organization's perspective.


To investigate the opportunities to enhance the implementation


of IoT and circular economy initiatives, an understanding of stake-


holder expectations and attitudes (government customers and sup-


pliers) is required (Wen et al., 2018). Within the circular economy and


IoT, only a few studies have considered what it means for Industry 4.0


to contribute to the circular economy (Esposito, 2017). Instead, most


studies have focused on assessing the link between the circular econ-


omy and Industry 4.0 (Ingemarsdotter, Jamsin, & Balkenende, 2020;


Rosa et al., 2020). The need to consider the linkages between circular


economy initiatives and understanding stakeholders' interests and


expectations has been acknowledged (e.g., Govindan & Hasanagic,


2018). Manavalan and Jayakrishna (2019) have called for more


understanding of IoT requirements from different stakeholders'


perspectives. Alcayaga, Wiener, and Hansen (2019) have called for


developing a better understanding of the different external and inter-


nal elements, such as stakeholders and organizational culture, for the


successful implementation of remanufacturing and recycling services.


Previous studies have investigated the implications of IoT on pro-


duction and a product's life cycle management and circular economy.


Organizing stakeholders' interests and expectations is not clear in the


circular economy. To fill this research gap, we draw on Industry 4.0


and circular economy research to review the literature. From this, we


explain the stakeholders' interests and expectations and identify


future research streams. We start by dividing the available literature


in Industry 4.0 into two significant areas: the circular economy and


IoT. We examine the literature that either concurrently or indepen-


dently discusses the circular economy and IoT with an Industry 4.0


perspective. Later, we extend this discussion to provide future


research avenues while considering the individual interest and expec-


tations established among the Industry 4.0 stakeholders. Thus, the


objective of our literature review is twofold. First, we provide an


updated overview of the literature in rapidly growing areas in the field


of circular economy and Industry 4.0. This objective is to help struc-


ture research fields of circular economy in the context of Industry 4.0


as a current industrial revolution, identify an emerging field of


research themes, and highlight significant research gaps. Second, we


aim to synthesize the literature analysis to identify Industry 4.0


stakeholder interest and expectations regarding how the IoT enables


circular economy management.


In this study, we take a systematic approach to the analysis of


prior work on circular economy concerning the IoT, identifying stake-


holders' expectations and interests in the context of Industry 4.0. The


essential advantage of the systematic literature review method is its


ability to curtail bias and provide of collective understanding of


the phenomena under study (Thomé, Scavarda, Ceryno, & Remmen,


2016). This methodology's contributions include but are not limited to


advancing the understanding of the circular economy in Industry 4.0.


Here, we propose advancing understanding from a supply-side


perspective. This perspective is essential for several reasons. First, we


increase the knowledge regarding how stakeholders' interests and


expectations affect Industry 4.0 in circular economy practices.


This study thus promotes an understanding of how stakeholders'


roles interact. From a manufacturing industry perspective, our findings


reveal the essential roles of suppliers, customers, and competitors


regarding their impacts on circular economy practices. Second, we


respond to the call for research by Govindan and Hasanagic (2018) to


understand how multistakeholders' involvement is a prerequisite to


successfully implementing circular economy practices. To this end, we


can identify external stakeholder interests and expectations to


implement reuse and remanufacturing practices. Finally, we can offer


insights about which companies ought to anticipate benefits or


pressure from stakeholders and why companies face high or low


stakeholders' pressure. Managers can gain insights regarding how they


can direct efforts and resources toward product system design for


circular economy options and remanufacturing with IoT to improve


operations.


2 | LITERATURE REVIEW


2.1 | Prior literature


A recent literature review study on Industry 4.0 has dealt with


a circular economy and waste management (Sarc et al., 2019).


2 AWAN ET AL.






































Kerin and Pham (2019) add to this literature a thorough analysis of


Industry 4.0 technologies in production, focusing on the IoT in


remanufacturing. They suggested that future research must focus on a


broader scale of adoption of IoT in remanufacturing. The Industry 4.0


area is of interest to many researchers in the context of a circular


economy. Kerin and Pham (2019) summarized the literature review


findings, discussing benefits from Industry 4.0, including greater coop-


eration among stakeholders, the use of artificial in decision making,


and expand product service system as ways to developing new service


or products. Also, considering IoT applications like embedded sensors


or RFID, Kerin and Pham (2019) discussed disassembly and


remanufacturing opportunities. One literature review by Lopes de


Sousa Jabbour et al. (2019) analyzes the development of a circular


business model (CBM) in operation management and focuses on inter-


organizational technologies.


A previous study relating to the smart product-service system


and future perspective reveals that a human-centric life cycle manage-


ment approach is required (Zheng, Wang, Chen, & Pheng, 2019). A


prior literature review has explored the linkage between Industry 4.0


and the circular economy (Cezarino, Liboni, Oliveira Stefanelli,


Oliveira, & Stocco, 2019). They highlighted that Industry 4.0 tools


could be useful for a circular economy if there is clear articulation


among different actors regarding how to promote the digitization of


business models. Other literature reviews focus on new business


models that enable a circular economy by applying new digital tech-


nologies (Bressanelli et al., 2018). The literature on digitization and


the circular economy (Okorie et al., 2018) examines articles published


between 2019 and 2000. The literature review was limited to a


SCOPUS search. From what we can see from the literature, future


studies need to explore the connection between the circular economy


and Industry 4.0. Why? Because there is an expectation that the IoT


could serve as a vital tool in manufacturing depending on the


current IT infrastructure level. Interestingly, Franciosi, Lambiase, and


Miranda (2017) discussed the benefits posed to IoT's increasing reli-


ance when Industry 4.0 could upgrade and boost remanufactured and


used spare parts.


Combined with IoT tools, decision-makers could evaluate data for


product maintenance or extend product life by replacing parts or


components. Within the existing studies, we find little evidence


focused on Industry 4.0 tools, with an overlooked opportunity to inves-


tigate the interests and expectations of Industry 4.0 stakeholders


(i.e., management, international regulators, society, customers, and sup-


pliers) regarding IoT application in improving circularity of products and


materials. The above-discussed studies show that most of the literature


on reconnecting Industry 4.0 tools and implementing the circular econ-


omy. However, we find a gap in the literature reviews examining Indus-


try 4.0 interests and expectations. There is an essential need for


research about IoT and circular economy, as this field of inquiry is


experiencing an unprecedented rate of progress. It is imperative to


contribute a summary of the most recent works, particularly in the


realm of IoT and circular economy, to uncover best practices and help


guide future research. A review of prior research informing this study


on integrating Industry 4.0 and the circular economy is in Table 1.


2.2 | Industry 4.0 and IoT


The phrase “Internet of things” was first presented in the latter part
of the 1990s by business owner Kevin Ashton. One of the pioneers


of the Auto-Id program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-


ogy (MIT) participated in a group that identified how to link material


appliances to the internet using RFID labels. Later in 2011, Germany


was the first country to establish the term Industry 4.0 to increase


industrial efficiency, productivity, safety, and transparency. The


notion of Industry 4.0 is still in its beginning stages. It is one of the


axions of a cyber-physical production system representing informa-


tion exchange and collaboration within business units and across the


global value chain (Szalavetz, 2019). The concept of Industry 4.0


rooted in a smart production concept called a smart factory or smart


manufacturing (Kang et al., 2016). As introduced by the German


government, the Industrial Revolution is a mindset, a lens through


which to consider the application of digitization technologies, so


they potentially offer a competitive advantage (Kagermann, Lukas, &


Wahlster, 2011). One of the core tenets of Industry 4.0 is that it


offers digital automation and the exchange of data in production.


This includes industrial internet of things (IIOT) (Lasi, Fettke,


Kemper, Feld, & Hoffmann, 2014), cloud computing, artificial


intelligence (AI; Manyika et al., 2013), smart manufacturing


(E. Hofmann & Rüsch, 2017), and the “smart factory” (Brettel,
Friederichsen, Keller, & Rosenberg, 2014).


Although the Industry 4.0 concept was developed primarily in


manufacturing, it is related to different areas other than automation in


production and services. In this view, IoT offers many opportunities


for industries to develop and exploit recycled or reused products to


increase their marketability. IoT has significant benefits for product


development to recover parts and components after the end of life


products. IoT has applications in different fields such as marketing and


supply chain and can be expanded o smart cities. There are two essen-


tial categories of IoT. Internet of services (IoS) is referred as follows:


“Internet of Services (IoS) harmonizes various applications into inter-
operable services and uses semantics for understanding, combining,


and processing data and information from different service providers,


sources, and formats” (Scuotto, Ferraris, & Bresciani, 2016). Second,
the Internet of people (IoP) summarizes as “people becoming part of
ubiquitous intelligent networks having the potential to seamlessly


connect, interact, and exchange information about themselves and


their social context and environment” (Hernández-Muñoz
et al., 2011, p. 449).


Applications of IoT and Industry 4.0 can be found in previous


studies. Bienhaus and Haddud (2018) studied Industry 4.0 influence


on procurement (along with Dolgui, Ivanov, Sethi, & Sokolov, 2019)


production schedules, “real-time visibility on machines, component,
and status” (Cheng-Hsin Chuang et al., 2017), improvements in prod-
uct quality, (Majeed & Rupasinghe, 2017) Industry 4.0, and IoT


embracing. IoT has also been used to study in different Industries such


as households, e-retailers, hospitals, energy management, fire fighting,


construction, product life-cycle energy management, and telecommu-


nications. The literature reveals that Industry 4.0 offers many research


AWAN ET AL. 3










opportunities primarily due to all of the different industry sectors it


touches. Hence, integrating the role of Industry 4.0 can shed light on


the consequences of flexible manufacturing. The key concept of


Industry 4.0 technologies is promising to promote Reconfigurable


Manufacturing Systems (RMS) (Dalenogare, Benitez, Ayala, &


Frank, 2018). Within the modular structured Smart Factories of I4.0,


“CPS monitors physical processes, creates a virtual copy of the
physical world, and makes decentralized decisions” (Boyes, Hallaq,
Cunningham, & Watson, 2018).


This allows an increasingly balanced production process, can


increase flexibility, improve quality, and help achieve industrial


performance (Dalenogare et al., 2018) and advancement of resource


consumption (Kagermann, Helbig, Hellinger, & Wahlster, 2013).


Achievement of resource consumption has become an established


means of Industry 4.0 for resource efficiency. IoT may be the most


beneficial source from which the new policy and market orientation


concept of the circular economy could find theoretical guidance. IoT


has been a long tradition in a different industry from different


perspective, with the aim of in-depth analysis of organization under-


standing on stakeholders interests and expectations toward IoT.


Industry 4.0 technologies are creating opportunities for intelligent


manufacturing systems and improving production and process perfor-


mance in the industrial environment. See Table 2 for a summary of


relevant information regarding the history of Industry 4.0.


3 | REVIEW METHODOLOGY


We utilized a systematic literature search methodology supported by


Okoli and Schabram (2010). The systematic literature review aims to


TABLE 1 Summary of previous literature review


Author Title Data source


(Kerin & Pham, 2019) “A review of emerging industry 4.0
technologies in remanufacturing”


How virtual reality (VR) and augmented
reality (AR) support circular business
models


Van Fan, Lee, Lim, Klemeš, and Le (2019) “Cross-disciplinary approaches towards a
smart, resilient and sustainable circular
economy”


Identified approaches for the sustainable
circular economy


Sarc et al. (2019) “Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in the
value chain of circular economy-oriented
waste management—A review


This study focuses on analyzing the needs,
requirements, and trends for waste
management in Industry 4.0


Nord, Koohang, and Paliszkiewicz (2019) “The internet of things: Review and
theoretical framework”


Review, develop a conceptual framework
considering IoT stakeholders, IoT
adoption, challenges, and priority areas of
research.


Manavalan and Jayakrishna (2019) “A review of the internet of things (IoT)
embedded sustainable supply chain for
Industry 4.0 requirements”


Explore potential research files in the
context of IoT and Industry 4.0


Alcayaga et al. (2019) “Towards a framework of smart-circular
systems: An integrative literature review”


This study focuses on the use of IoT for
maintenance, reuse, and remanufacturing


Lopes de Sousa Jabbour et al. (2019) “Circular economy business models and
operations management”


The research stream on IoT is relatively
new. Future research studies need to
explore the connection between the
circular economy and the internet of
things.


Zheng et al. (2019) “A survey of smart product-service systems:
Key aspects, challenges, and future
perspectives”


Future challenges: Embedded IT with a
product requires a human-centric
perspective and circular lifecycle
management approach in a digital
environment.


Bressanelli et al. (2018) “Exploring how usage-focused business
models enable circular economy through
digital technologies”


Do IoT technologies help to promote the
circular economy


Okorie et al. (2018) “Digitisation and the circular economy: A
review of current research and future
trends”


Lack of research on how digital
technologies enable a circular economy.
The literature review was limited to the
SCOPUS search database and a
systematic review conducted on articles
published between 2018 and 2000.


Zhong, Xu, Klotz, and Newman (2017) “Intelligent manufacturing in the context of
Industry 4.0: A review”


4 AWAN ET AL.










summarize existing literature to answer a specific scientific question


(Koutsos, Menexes, & Dordas, 2019). The systematic review reflects


the notion that review is based on selected criteria to answer a


focused question, leading to a conclusion (Schünemann et al., 2020).


We apply a systematic literature review technique used in the study


to identify existing ideas and existing knowledge in specific areas. A


literature review is an accepted method of studying the topic and pro-


vide a proper context. A systematic literature review is a more objec-


tive and organized review of existing literature on a scientific topic


(Munn, Stern, Aromataris, Lockwood, & Jordan, 2018). Systematic


reviews provide a particular and replicable method of reducing bias in


selecting and evaluating articles. The systematic literature review


method has identified relevant studies via structured query searches


to assess if they relevant to the focused scientific questions (see,


e.g., Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, Altman, & Prisma Group, 2009). We


selected a systematic review for several reasons. First, it helps to


obtain an interdisciplinary and detailed overview of a topic. Second, it


helps to answer a focused question (Sargeant, Rajic, Read, &


Ohlsson, 2006). A systematic literature review presents research on


emerging issues by identifying the research and specifying future


research studies (Govindan, Soleimani, & Kannan, 2015).


This literature review has become prominent among academic


scholars from diverse disciplines (Dubey, Gunasekaran, Childe,


Papadopoulos, & Fosso Wamba, 2017). We conducted a literature


review involving three researchers and consulted on all the selected


articles to be considered for review. The purpose of conducting a sys-


tematic review is to synthesize previous research work and then


briefly present the advances on a scientific research topic (Koutsos


et al., 2019). Prior literature review studies have used a similar


approach (Andoni et al., 2019; Brauer & Wiersema, 2018). Previous


systematic literature review studies have also followed a similar


approach. For this study, we next review the methodology and how


we operationalized the literature review within the context of our pri-


mary research question and objectives. This process is enabled by the


use of databases to help collect and organize the relevant literature.


The rationale behind using Scopus and the web of science data for


keyword searches is that both databases contain peer-reviewed scien-


tific publications.


To this end, we are particularly interested in work published since


2006 in the circular economy and IoT field. These databases help the


review process to be transparent, focused, and can provide evidence


to inform practitioners and researchers. Following the previous stud-


ies' recommendation, we identified the relevant published papers for


our literature review, which specially focused on both fields: circular


economy and Industry 4.0. We searched Scopus and web of science


databases for academic articles containing key terms. The keywords


used in our initial research are in Table 3. This key search strategy


generated 473 articles. To locate the relevant articles, we required


that the titles, abstract, and keywords of articles have either the circu-


lar economy or Industry 4.0 or both.


We removed articles that did not mention or dealt with the


requirements above. After gathering the articles from both databases,


we inspected and identified all of them that debated the circular


economy and Industry 4.0. Some articles did not individually examine


TABLE 2 The history of Industry 4.0


Prior Developments Time Period


Digital manufacturing During the 1970s


Computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) During the 1990s


Digital factory From 2000


Factory 2.0 From 2005 onward


Smart factory From around 2007


Industry 4.0 From 2011 onward


Adapted (Roser, 2016)


TABLE 3 List of keywords used in search


Web of science Total


Key terms “Internet of things” AND
“stakeholder”


47


“Stakeholder” AND”circular
economy”


59


Article types. Article and
review articles


“Industry 4.0” AND
“stakeholder “


04


Journal(s): All


The search field(s): Topic


“Industry 4.0” AND “circular
economy “


13


“Digital technologies”
AND”circular economy”


05


Scopus


The search field(s): Title,
abstract and keywords


“Internet of things” AND
“stakeholder”


203


Scientific areas(s): All


Journal(s): All


Article type: Journal, review
papers


Publication storage: Final


“Stakeholder” AND”circular
economy”


187


“Industry 4.0” AND
“stakeholder “


37


“Industry 4.0” AND “circular
economy “


34


“Digital technologies”
AND”circular economy”


07


Exclusion criteria Book reviews, conference
proceedings, articles in the
press, editorial review.


Inclusion criteria Published articles, literature
review articles conducted
in any country, must
address circular economy


Time period 2006–2019


Data collected August 2019


AWAN ET AL. 5






circular economy from a manufacturing perspective or Industry 4.0.


Some articles have appeared in both databases, so we did a


duplication check test using Mendeley. After deleting the duplicate


articles, we reviewed 596 articles. See Figure 1 to depict the method-


ological research scheme adopted by (Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, &


Altman, 2009). This study focuses on the existing published literature


concerning the Industry 4.0 interest and expectations, including areas


of the circular economy related to IoT (Figure 2).


4 | ANALYSIS


4.1 | Circular economy


According to MacArthur (2013, p. 14), a circular economy is “an indus-
trial economy that is restorative or regenerative by intention and


design.” However Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, and Hultink (2017)
argue that a circular economy is “a regenerative system in which
resource input and waste emission and energy leakage are minimized


by slowing, closing and narrowing material and energy loops.” The
cornerstone of Industry 4.0 is the company stock of connected


devices, which is based on information flow from products to a


producer. Early work on circular economy put forward 3R founda-


tional premises (references), which were expanded later to 6 R. Later


still, these foundational premises have been condensed to 7R. The 5R


circular economy model provides the core aspects of the framework.


It was not aimed at being restricted to the industrial domain.


Scholars in the circular economy and strategic management have


shown interest in how responsible production and consumption


within a system generate economic value through waste management


and recycling (Betancourt Morales & Zartha Sossa, 2020). According


to F. Hofmann and Jaeger-Erben (2020, p. 2), a circular economy


“connects post-use and process waste with production through pro-
cesses such as recycling and repurposing of by-products, and attempts


to preserve the inherent value of products and product components


by maximizing the number of consecutive use phases and use time in


each of these phases via repair, maintenance, upgrade, resale,


refurbishment, remanufacturing.”
A circular economy uses waste as an input in other parts of the


value chain and widely focuses on closed-loop materials (Barreiro-


Gen & Lozano, 2020). Subsequently, the circular economy research


stream has generally started in emerging countries (Awan,


Kraslawski, & Huiskonen, 2018). Each of these circular economy


dimensions can be tied directly into a sustainability context.


F IGURE 1 Articles selected


F IGURE 2 Industry 4.0. Adapted from Roser (2016)


6 AWAN ET AL.






We also find Industry 4.0 becoming more approachable and


workable regarding a circular economy in emerging countries (Daú,


Scavarda, Scavarda, & Portugal, 2019). Turner et al. (2019) analyze lit-


erature on sustainable production with a focus on the circular econ-


omy. The circular economy is defined by Kirchherr et al. (2017) as an


economic system based on reuse, reduction, recycling, and extraction


of materials from the end-of-life products to accomplish long-term


sustainable development goals. Some take-back laws have even been


implemented in Belgium, China, and some states in the United States


(Chia-Hung Chuang, Wang, & Zhao, 2014). The CBM is considered a


vital determinant of the extent to which firms can apply reuse and


remanufacturing business models to reduce cost and radical reduc-


tions in environmental impact (Linder & Williander, 2017).


The term recycling has been in the literature for some time, and it


is fundamental to the circular economy and linked to resource cycling


(Murray, Skene, & Haynes, 2017). Recycling is limited to resource


cycling and focuses on enhancing the life of reused material, parts,


and products through better maintenance of operations and


manufacturing processes. The concept of recycling refers to “any
recovery operations by which waste materials are reprocessed into


products, materials, whether for the original or other purposes”
(European Commission, 2008). The reuse refers to using the product


to the product's maximum life (Stahel, 2014). The reuse principle


refers to “any operation by which products or components that are
not waste are used again for the same purpose they were conceived”
(European Commission, 2008). Figure 3 shows product reuse,


remanufacturing, recycling, and disposal demands fewer resources


and less energy.


4.2 | Research at the intersection of industry 4.0
and CE


Today, many firms have started to implement IoT to improve and


maintain operational efficiency (Tarifa-Fernández, Sánchez-Pérez, &


Cruz-Rambaud, 2019). The implementation of IoT may cut costs,


reduce waste, and resources can be used elsewhere. IoT can be


applied in the remanufacturing process for improving quality. The


improvement in product quality leads to reduce waste, lower


transportation, higher sales, and increase customer satisfaction


(Fathym, n.d.). For example, in the repair process, the parts embedded


with the sensor can transmit real data on the customers' quality stan-


dards, thus building better customer relationship management. IoT


can help inform the managers before the end of life of the parts or


components, so the manager proactively replaces the parts and


acquires the end-of-life product for recycling purposes. IoT is becom-


ing essential for the industries who intend to transition toward circular


economy paths. IoT provides a set of practices that can deliver circular


economy advantages.


IoT can aid in asset retrieval so that it can be recycled into its


components. By embedding IoT with products can remotely monitor


the product conditions, thereby allowing predictive maintenance


immediately or developing a schedule for repairing the product


(Esposito, 2017). The product embedded IoT devices and provides


feedback when it requires repair, maintenance, and end of life and can


be considered a smart product. This smart product enables companies


to develop new business models and create service providers and


manufacturers (Frank, Dalenogare, & Ayala, 2019). As indicated by


Wollschlaeger, Sauter, and Jasperneite (2017), digitization advance-


ment increased productivity and reduced energy waste from pro-


cesses and machines. The interaction between the cyber-physical


system of Industry 4.0 and the integration of stakeholders coopera-


tions is a prerequisite for circular manufacturing. According to


Park (2016), a hyperconnected network is essential for creating an


opportunity to develop new products embedded in internal


competencies. Park (2016) stated that hyperautomation generates


hyperconnectivity, which connects humans' operational performance


with high automation and technology. Thus, an investigation of


hyperconnectivity's role will be another theoretical and practical con-


tribution of the study.


F IGURE 3 Circular economy
practices (Mihelcic et al., 2003)


AWAN ET AL. 7






















Previous studies have pointed out that Industry 4.0 can be used


to better support material efficiency, feedback information, and “facil-
itating collection points for reuse and recycling” (Luiz Mattos
Nascimento et al., 2018).


Despite some barriers and challenges of implementing circular


economy practices, the future implementation of an IoT-enhanced cir-


cular economy is fruitful for manufacturing firms (Esposito, 2017).


Industry 4.0 aims to combine many technologies for the common


good to achieve responsiveness and enhance a production system's


quality. The intended purpose of elements of Industry 4.0 is to


improve and advance in production efficiency. Automatic detection of


a fault in the product promotes enhanced self-governing automation


in the manufacturing process.


AI is designed to monitor and forecast failures, repair, and support


another task that enhances accuracy. Tao, Qi, Liu, and Kusiak (2018)


pointed out that AI, which contains elements of the IoT, enables pre-


dictive maintenance. From a production efficiency perspective, Tao


et al. (2018) suggested that AI helps increase quality and identify non-


conformities in the early stages of product development. Industry 4.0


elements are an exchange of information at its most superficial level


and provide feedback to improve production efficiencies to reduce


waste generation and control air pollution. IoT is an application to pro-


duce smart products. Smart products can be considered beneficial to


provide early warning signals for predictive maintenance or fault sig-


nals or broke down any machine parts.


Within an IoT, the environment is involved in creating circularity


products, for example, IoT, cloud computing, cyber-physical system,


smart manufacturing, smart product, and AI. To the part of the circu-


lar economy products, each of these elements of the IoT environ-


ment integrates resources in a way that helps to achieve objectives.


The circular economy embedded with the IoT in every industrial


sector has a significant opportunity to monitor and automate reuse,


repair, and remanufacturing processes. With the application of IoT, it


provides real-time information about how actually product used and


handled by logistic clients and end-user. The key benefit of circular


practices embedded with the IoT is the ability to make an informed


decision. Firms may plan the repair schedule based on the sensor


data and understand when maintenance or repair is a need. This


information may help to redesign the parts, components, and prod-


ucts to extend the product's life cycle and provide more sustained


benefits.


The use of IoT sensors in product recovery enables proactive


maintenance alerts. There are many opportunities to redesign prod-


ucts when they deviate from their intended performance. For exam-


ple, a sensor can be used in TVs to monitor screen resolution.


Manufacturers can then actively monitor which part or component is


not performing to standards to redesign the product to reduce costs


and product return time while increasing customer satisfaction. With


the IoT's help, they can recover the product from an actual user and


deliver the new one before they launch the complaint. Finally, to fur-


ther closing the loop of materials and products, current practices of


the circular economy need to depart from the traditional practices


and embraced the Industry 4.0 digitization tools for the green


economy and prevent negative impacts on the natural environment.


Table 4 provide summaries of the selected papers.


4.3 | A stakeholder view


A stakeholder refers to “any group or individual who can affect or is
affected by the achievement of the firm's objectives” (Parmar
et al., 2010). Industry 4.0 organizational stakeholders can affect the


organization or are affected by them can compromise but are not scant


to international Institutional Regulations, suppliers, and customers.


Although some studied interfirm stakeholders partnership in the


manufacturing context (Lieder, Asif, Rashid, Mihelič, & Kotnik, 2017),


there remains a need for literature review on understanding the stake-


holder's interest and expectations on implementation of circular econ-


omy practices. The process of stakeholder interest and expectations


affecting the implementation of creative ideas into the circular economy


is not clear. According to Parmar et al. (2010), “stakeholders are those
active groups whose action can significantly impact the firm operational


objective.” With changes in the internal patterns, much can be gained
from incremental technology improvements, but to attain the European


Commission roadmap for 2050 for moving to a competitive low-carbon


economy in 2050 (European Commision, 2012).


Advances in technology development have brought interest in


the green environment. For example, for companies to become more


environmentally friendly, reduce greenhouse gases, and fewer mate-


rials, firms need to consider full circular economy practices. In another


example, Black and Decker are starting to produce a durable drill,


which is equipped with IoT to charge people per minute use and indi-


cate when the replacement is needed. Institutions can play an active


role in push a circular economy at the consumption level. European


Union (EU) initiatives on product design and extending product life


positively impact consumption through durability, reparability, and


functionality (Alonso-Almeida, Rodríguez-Antón, Bagur-Femenías, &


Perramon, 2020). At the end of the drill's life, many parts of the prod-


uct will be reused for new products of the same size or smaller size


(Valerio, 2017). As a result, the government and international organi-


zations worldwide have already implemented product take-back laws


and regulations. In this study, stakeholder interest is considered from


an organization's perspective. It refers to different stakeholders (inter-


national legislation organizations, customers, and suppliers) who want


to know and hold the attention to catch the Industrial Revolution's


emerging opportunities. In this study, expectations consider present


and future organization interests. Stakeholder expectations are


referred to as optimism that the organization should achieve.


5 | DISCUSSION


5.1 | Stakeholders interests and expectations


Our review revealed that a limited number of articles have emerged


over the last few years in the Industry 4.0 and circular economy


8 AWAN ET AL.










TABLE 4 Provide summaries of the selected papers


Authors Title Methods Findings


Van Fan et al. (2019) “Disciplinary approaches towards smart,
resilient and sustainable circular
economy”


Review Building consensus among stakeholders,
identification of common barriers
involvement of stakeholder


Gupta, Chen, Hazen, Kaur, and
Santibañez Gonzalez (2019)


“Circular economy and big data
analytics: A stakeholder perspective”


Qualitative An understanding of the stakeholder
perspective on big data analytics is
necessary for the circular economy.


Rajput and Singh (2019b) “Industry 4.0—Challenges to implement
a circular economy”


Literature review Identify barriers and challenges. This
study identifies cyber-physical
systems standards and specifications,
sensor technology is the most
influential Industry 4.0 barriers for
achieving a circular economy:


Lopes de Sousa Jabbour et al. (2019) “Industry 4.0 and the circular economy:
a proposed research agenda and
original roadmap for sustainable
operations”


Literature review Future researchers should investigate
the connection of cyber-physical
systems to the IoT to support smart
remanufacturing


Cezarino et al. (2019) “Diving into emerging economies
bottleneck: Industry 4.0 and
implications for a circular economy”


Literature review How IoT and circular economy can
contribute to the development of a
competitive advantage.


Kerin and Pham (2019) “A review of emerging Industry 4.0
technologies in remanufacturing”


Literature review Future researchers explore the
connection between IoT to support
smart remanufacturing


Chauhan, Sharma, and Singh (2019) “An SAP-LAP linkages framework for
integrating Industry 4.0 and circular
economy”


Muticriteria decision
making


IoT is the most important for a circular
economy.


Zheng et al. (2019) “A survey of smart product-service
systems: Key aspects, challenges, and
future perspectives”


Literature review Key aspects in achieving circular
economy: smart reconfiguration,
predictive maintenance, sensor-
embedded products or end of life
prediction, the vision of shared value,


Sarc et al. (2019) “Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in
the value chain of circular economy-
oriented waste management—A
review”


Literature review Industry 4.0 enablers circular economy
by bringing transparency


Rajput and Singh (2019a) “Connecting the circular economy and
Industry 4.0”


Muticriteria decision
making


Industry 4.0 and organizational
sustainability


Charnley et al. (2019) “Simulation to enable a data-driven
circular economy”


Modeling 4th Industrial Revolution (I4.0) and the
IoT can increase digital intelligence


Manavalan and Jayakrishna (2019) “A review of IoT embedded sustainable
supply chain for Industry 4.0
requirements”


Literature review Invest in technology to increase the
well-being of Industry 4.0.


Alcayaga et al. (2019) “Towards a framework of smart-circular
systems: Integrative literature
review”


Literature review IoT could disrupt business models and
has the potential to foster a circular
economy


Nascimento et al. (2019) “Exploring Industry 4.0 technologies to
enable circular economy practices in a
manufacturing context”


Qualitative Future researchers should explore how
rising technologies from Industry 4.0
can be integrated with circular
economy practices


Varela, Araújo, !Avila, Castro, and
Putnik (2019)


“Evaluation of the relation between
lean manufacturing, Industry 4.0, and
sustainability”


Empirical analysis Industry 4.0, and sustainability are
salient topic for the companies.


Kusiak (2019) “Fundamentals of smart manufacturing:
A multi-thread perspective”


Modeling Industry 4.0 tools provide the
extraction of meaningful information
on labeling material for the
environmental and evolution stage of
the new learning.


(Continues)


AWAN ET AL. 9






TABLE 4 (Continued)


Authors Title Methods Findings


Daú et al. (2019) “The healthcare sustainable supply
chain 4.0: The circular economy
transition conceptual framework with
the corporate social responsibility
mirror”


Empirical analysis The fourth industrial revolution
integrates, bringing circularity to the
process and contributing to
sustainable development goals.


Nord et al. (2019) “The internet of things: Review and
theoretical framework”


Literature review Further research should be conducted
regarding IoT priority areas to guide
IoT implementation teams.


Martín-Gómez, Aguayo-González, and
Luque (2019)


“A colonic framework for managing the
sustainable supply chain in emerging
economies with smart connected
metabolism”


Mathematical
modeling


Industry 4.0 may give rise to the
development of circularity solutions
and allows analysis of distributed
complex systems.


Castelo-Branco, Cruz-Jesus, and
Oliveira (2019)


“Assessing Industry 4.0 readiness in
manufacturing: Evidence for the
European Union”


Empirical This study examines the existence of
the factors that characterize Industry
4.0 in manufacturing across EU
countries.


Turner et al. (2019) “Sustainable production in a circular
economy: A business model for re-
distributed manufacturing”


Case study Increase in customer involvement
influences on redistributed model
implementation


Bressanelli et al. (2018) “Exploring how usage-focused business
models enable circular economy
through digital technologies”


Literature review Lack of research on how digital
technologies enable the circular
economy transition. Digitization
improving product design, attracting
target customers, and provision of
preventive and predictive
maintenance,


Wen et al. (2018) “Design, implementation, and
evaluation of an internet of things
(IoT) a network system for restaurant
food waste management”


Literature review The IoT-based system has had net
positive effects for the stakeholders
involved,


Lin (2018) “User experience-based product design
for smart production to empower
Industry 4.0 in the glass recycling
circular economy”


Literature review Industry 4.0 for smart production in the
glass recycling


Asdecker and Felch (2018) “When stakeholder pressure drives the
circular economy measuring the
mediating role of innovation
capabilities”


Mathematical
modeling


Industry 4.0 can be useful in industrial
companies for value creation at both
ends


Bonilla, Silva, da Silva, Gonçalves, and
Sacomano (2018)


“Industry 4.0 and sustainability
implications: A scenario-based
analysis of the impacts and
challenges”


Qualitative analysis Application of Industry 4.0 is closely
dependent on societal reactions,
public policies, and legal frameworks.


Yang, Raghavendra, Kaminski, and
Pepin (2018)


“Opportunities for Industry 4.0 to
support remanufacturing”


Literature review Increase reliability and efficiency can be
supported by a variety for Industry
4.0 tools.


Bachér, Pihkola, Kujanpää, and
Mroueh (2018)


“Advancing the circular economy
through group decision-making and
stakeholder involvement”


Muticriteria decision
making


Transparent and real-time information
on the material flow analysis within
value chains is essential for advancing
a circular economy. Development of
transparent information requires a
more well-planned application of new
technological solutions


Okorie et al. (2018) “Digitisation and the circular economy:
A review of current research and
future trends”


Literature review The findings from the study highlight
that Industry 4.0 (I4.0) would be
essential for a circular industrial
system.


(Continues)


10 AWAN ET AL.






research category. Based on the literature review analysis, most of the


existing literature only briefly presents the Industry 4.0 system design


ideas. The majority of research studies focus on the application of IoT


and circular economy. At present, many manufacturing industries have


begun to put into practice circular economy awareness and thinking


into traditional operational practices driven by demands from regula-


tors, institutions, and customers. See Table 5 for Industry 4.0 stake-


holders' interests and expectations. For example, a literature review


study (Garcia-Muiña et al., 2019) investigates the relationship


between Industry 4.0 and the manufacturing context's circular econ-


omy. They suggested that Industry 4.0 allows real-time redesigning


solutions. Wen et al. (2018) have also examined the potential of using


the IoT for the implementation and evaluation of food waste. These


studies suggest that a detailed analysis of IoT and circular economy in


the Industry 4.0 perspective is lacking. The literature review by Sarc


et al. (2019) illustrates how digitalization tools will make it feasible to


optimize waste management in advancing a circular economy.


Lin (2018) examines how customer experience accelerates transition


“or smart production to empower Industry 4.0 in the glass recycling
circular economy.”


On the other hand, the role and impact of stakeholders' interests


appear much more complicated at the circular economy level. For exam-


ple, Genovese, Acquaye, Figueroa, and Koh (2017) and Su et al. (2013)


stress that government initiatives lead to an even more substantial ben-


efit from the circular economy practices because this pressure led to


the development of the policy of raw material procurement.


An empirical case study on Subaru Indiana steel exemplifies,


reducing the scrap by changing the steel coils during the supplier's


TABLE 4 (Continued)


Authors Title Methods Findings


Dalenogare et al. (2018) “The expected contribution of Industry
4.0 technologies for industrial
performance”


Empirical This study shows that a better
understanding of the sociotechnical
perspective, human factors, and
organizational perspective are
relevant to implement Industry 4.0
for manufacturing performance
outcomes.


Pagoropoulos, Pigosso, and
McAloone (2017)


“The emergent role of digital
technologies in the circular economy:
A review”


Literature review This study reconnects the concept of
digital technologies to broader
challenges of the circular economy.


Li et al. (2017) “A review of industrial wireless
networks in the context of Industry
4.0, wireless networks”


Literature review Lack of research on the use and
application of AI in the Industry 4.0
framework


Zhong et al. (2017) “Intelligent manufacturing in the
context of Industry 4.0: A review”


Review This study suggests that intelligent
manufacturing plays an economically
significant role in mass customization,
better quality, and improved
productivity.


Lieder and Rashid (2016) “Towards circular economy
implementation: A comprehensive
review in the context of the
manufacturing industry”


Literature review This review suggests that the support of
all stakeholders is necessary in order
to implement the circular economy
concept.


Su, Heshmati, Geng, and Yu (2013) “A review of the circular economy in
China: Moving from rhetoric to
implementation”


Review The findings suggest that technology is
a key factor in the development of a
circular economy. Each of the three
circular economy principles requires
advanced technology and
development and the updating of
facilities and equipment.


Standing, Jackson, Sarkis, and
Zhu (2008)


“Information technology and systems in
China's circular economy”


Literature review The first study to develop a link
between information technology and
the circular economy to make further
environmental performance. a circular
economy can make further progress
with the help of technological
innovation.


Yuan, Bi, and Moriguichi (2006) “The circular economy A new
development strategy in China”


Literature review The circular economy strategy is a more
likely path to achieving improvements
in resource productivity and eco-
efficiency.


AWAN ET AL. 11










TABLE 5 Industry 4.0 stakeholders interest and expectations


Stakeholders


Institutions Interest concerns
• Assist maintenance using IoT can generate more tax on reuse material.
• Improved waste management.
• Better decision making on financial support to industry on reuse and developing resilience supply chain.
• Management and evaluation of real-time information on waste generation, recycling, reuse, recovery, and remanufacturing.
• Monitoring energy, waste, and water usage patterns and discourage illegal dumping of waste.
• Strengthen industrial relationships with different actors to improve take-back solutions.


Expectations
• Industry 4.0 and virtual intelligent manufacturing technologies (virtual reality and augmented reality implementation) for the


circular economy will be essential for greening the industries.
• Ensure global access to the affordable product for all.
• Achieve a high level of economic stability and productivity.
• Mobilizing small enterprisers to enable smart technology and source material from local where appropriate


Strategies
• Incentives for e-procurement and provided more support for building infrastructure to support the circular economy (reuse,


remanufacturing, recovery, recycling, and upcycling).
• By setting promotional marketing programs for a product-service system
• Provide financial support initiatives and investments for digitizing industry for the circular economy.
• Support for research funding on developing machine learning approaches and use of artificial intelligence.
• Develop better regulations for public-private partnership and global reverse networks


Suppliers Interest concerns
• Improve predictive maintenance.
• Institutional incentives for the application of cloud computing to reduce the cost of communications.
• Increase product traceability throughout the entire product life cycle.
• Anticipate customer demand, quality improvement, and reduction of delivery time.
• Improving the security and safety of reverse logistics.


Expectations
• Experiment with chargers (and fast chargers) at fuel stations to.
• Learn about the use and possible business models.
• Flexible and reconfigurable production scheduling for cradle to cradle product design and distributed and collaborative


decision-making.
• Product flow monitoring, quality control of remanufactured products, and adaptive pricing mechanism.


Strategies
• Long-term business relationship and freedom of collaboration.
• Strength global reverse networks for recovery of critical raw material and resource mobilization.
• Participate in optimization and seize more relationship development opportunities to facilitate the efficient flow of material.


International
organizations


Interest concerns
• Improve operational efficiency and close the global, local, and regional loop.
• Utilization of artificial intelligence, big data analytics, cloud computing for effective decision making.
• Aligned incentives to redesign circular business models.
• Market expansion of reuse products across geographies and improve reverse cycle infrastructure.
• Transform markets to use of renewable resources and set global reverse networks.


Expectations
• Reorganize production planning and control for lean manufacturing with Industry 4.0.
• Focus on, reuse and recovery of material for upcycling form end of life products, and redeployment of infrastructure to


steer changing circular economy.
• Improving capabilities concerning business intelligence, big data analytics, application of machine learning approaches,


monitoring, and recovery of materials.
• Help to job creation, decent circular economy entrepreneurship, and innovation
• Encourage and growth of small and medium enterprises.


Strategies
• Establish collaboration with reverse logistic suppliers and participate in circular design activities.
• Facilitate technology development and sustainable infrastructure for demand forecast and inventory control.
• Upgrade the circular economy technological capabilities of Industry 4.0.
• Integration of digital capabilities for multilevel data sharing across organizations and networks. For real-time, data-driven,


and collaborative.
• Increase the use of efficient and adoption of cleaner production technologies
• Monitor CO2 emission.


12 AWAN ET AL.






environmental initiation program (Schroeder & Robinson, 2010). Gov-


ernment support and development of policies are crucial to the firms


to change the behavior to make decisions (Govindan &


Hasanagic, 2018). Government regulations can play a vital role in


improving infrastructure and reducing the tax on import or develop-


ment of IoT infrastructure for Industry 4.0. Governments have tre-


mendous power to increase the implementation of the regulatory


framework of Industry 4.0 to support their business using the IoT. The


Governments switched to IoT smart meters for its energy and water


usage monitoring, and recycling may improve immediate decision-


making and save taxes. Government, international organizations, and


suppliers can influence Industry 4.0 implementation. The direct data


available may enable the fundamental shift government to act as a


proactive service orientated that provides the industry with a marked


service experience. For the supplier's firm, with the help of IoT using


sensor data, detect when the product shipped, may detect early warn-


ing signals of quality standards and when likely to occur failure.


The process of implementation of circular economy practices in


Industry 4.0 is primarily influenced by stakeholder interest. If there is


no stakeholder expectation, any implementation will likely cease to


exist. However, all the firms are likely not too familiar with all the


practices and activities relevant to the greening environment. There-


fore, companies need to obtain support, necessary information, and


input from external stakeholders, such as customers, suppliers, and


governments. However, strategy formulation and value cocreation


activities for implementing circular economy practices are more com-


plex, as it involves various stakeholders in different stages of the sup-


ply chain. This view is also supported by Ghisellini, Cialani, and


Ulgiati (2016), who suggested that the circular economy practices are


continually changing. Companies need to consider stakeholders'


expectations at all stages. In this way, managing external stakeholders'


expectations are fundamental. The performance outcomes may


depend on the level of firm involvement in circular economy practices.


If firms acquire new resources and then apply knowledge to the pro-


duction to develop products using circular economy practices, it will


be more successful in reducing the environmental impact, reducing


cost, and promoting new employability. Customer demand for green


products is continually increasing and will become stronger in the


future. Demand from the end-markets is the primary trigger for busi-


ness and digital transformation. Every company is part of the supply


chain, and buyers can pressure the companies to comply with the


international environmental standards and be subject to the third-


party certification assessment of their circular economy practices.


Customers have a significant and complex role in firms to gain a


competitive advantage. Another study Balch (2018) shows a direct


and positive relationship between consumers' demands on taking back


used products. Supplier's Interest is also a significant factor in bringing


circular economy practices. Govindan and Hasanagic (2018) confirm


that government regulatory focus is a significant motive for


implementing circular economy practices. Especially internal-external


stakeholders (Tyl, Vallet, Bocken, & Real, 2015). Previous literature


has provided little guidance to help manufacturers integrate various


circular economy initiatives into an operational strategy. As a result,


manufacturing firms are now under pressure to implement initiatives


that balance firms' internal and external stakeholder perspectives.


Even though some leading businesses, including IKEA and H&M,


have introduced proactive circular economy initiatives, some studies


mention that circular economy implementations are due to the


coerced pressure by regulations. Institutional regulatory pressure is


also considered a key driver that encourages companies to motivate


the implement. Industrial competing demands have brought on com-


panies to undertake reuse practices (Mathews & Tan, 2011). It has


been suggested that one-way to take back used product is due to


competitive pressure (Ferguson, Guide, & Souza, 2006). Stakeholders


can affect the firm in achieving its objectives and goals (Parmar


et al., 2010). The implementation of circular economy practices has


two fundamental challenges: identifying stakeholders (Tyl et al., 2015)


and the extension of circular economy practices across the value chain


(Kalmykova, Sadagopan, & Rosado, 2017). The key stakeholders can


initiate, lead, and identify the value proposition and ultimate out-


comes as an integrated system for remanufacturing, reuse, and


recycling (Tyl et al., 2015). Thus, it is essential for manufacturing firms


to focus on reuse and remanufacturing practices (Golinska-


Dawson, 2018).


There is an increasing interest in examining how firms develop


effective circular economy practices in an open and closed-loop pro-


duction system. The manufacturing firms potentially intended to


implement circular economy practices when they perceive stake-


holders to provide knowledge-driven practices and resources. As such,


the manufacturing firm recognizes the opportunity to combine the


knowledge possessed by their employees. The manufacturing industry


faces the challenge of reducing its overall use of virgin resources and


focusing on end-of-life products' continuous use. For example, most


electronic manufacturing companies such as Sony, Huwai, and Apple


do not allow storage upgrades on a large number of their smartphone


models. They want their users to replace their batteries with their ser-


vice centers to support and develop more circular economy initiatives.


These components and parts embedded with Industry 4.0 tools may


help support much faster circular economy initiatives than those with-


out focusing on digital transformation. Thus, for better management


of the take-back product, we argue that the IoT is a prerequisite. Our


review also indicates that scholars have paid little attention to red-


esigning the operation and production system. Because previously,


manufacturer firms often design systems to track and trace the prod-


ucts within the transportation or at the early stages of product devel-


opment. The idea of IoT embedded in parts and components has been


around since the dawn of Industry 4.0. The idea has been practiced,


accompanied by the argument that it stimulates new design and rede-


sign manufacturing and remanufacturing practices to develop new


and innovative products.


5.2 | Future research opportunities


Our literature review provides evidence that research on integrating


Industry 4.0 tools in the circular economy is still far from maturity.


AWAN ET AL. 13






Many of the findings enable opportunities for further examinations,


and several other themes are worth investigating. Strategic manage-


ment scholars, those working on integrating Industry 4.0 tools into


operational strategy, should more affirmingly realize the pivotal role


of stakeholders' interests and expectations. We have generated valu-


able insights regarding the relationship between Industry 4.0 and the


circular economy. We believe that the successful implementation of


Industry 4.0 and circular economy practices requires clarity regarding


relevant stakeholders' interests and expectations.


Table 6 summarizes future research directions and essential


research questions, especially in four research streams: consequences


of stakeholders' influences, relationship between contextual con-


straints and big data analytics capabilities, the impact of big data on


intelligent manufacturing and strategic options, and creating sustain-


able value. Several studies have been conducted over the past years


that have concentrated on Industry 4.0 and circular economy. These


studies' findings have provided a further understanding of this phe-


nomenon and outline its importance from the stakeholder


TABLE 6 Summary of future research direction


Research streams Future research questions Influential authors


Consequences of stakeholders
influences


• How can institutional stakeholders provide support for an
effective and efficient circular economy?


• How do supplier collaboration and interorganizational
capabilities impact the gaining data insights for effective
decision making and the enhancement of circular
economy?


• How can organizations extend big data analytics
capabilities in guiding organizational performance?


• What is the impact on institutional change and circular
economy practices?


• Must all relevant stakeholders contribute to increase
efficiency and improve the management of natural
resources with the use of IoT?


Govindan and Hasanagic (2018)
de Sousa Jabbour et al. (2018)
Alcayaga et al. (2019); Pagoropoulos
et al. (2017)


Schulz, Hjaltadóttir, and Hild (2019)


Relationship between contextual
constrains and big data analytics
capabilities


• How does the presence of multiple stakeholder
expectations affect the implementation of big data
analytics on organizational decision making?


• What different external and internal factors affect the
choice of implementing IoT and its impact on improved
product quality and lean production approaches?


• Which has a stronger impact on the financial performance
of the organization, circular economy, and IoT practices
(virtualization, decentralization, modularity, and real-time
capability)


Marques, Agostinho, Zacharewicz, and
Jardim-Gonçalves (2017)


Qian, Zhong, and Du (2017)
Brettel et al. (2014)


Impact of big data on intelligent
manufacturing


• What is the effect of big data management capabilities on
the design of a value-added product-service system, and
how does it affect the firm's reputation?


• Do data insights reflect effective decision making?
• What external and internal factors increase or decrease the
effect of data insights on organizational performance?


• How do deviation from the use of big data analytics affect
the performance of decision making? How do intelligence
manufacturing technologies and infrastructure impact the
collaboration for the product-service system?


• How do industry characteristics interact with big data
analytics to influence decision making and long term
organizational performance?


Wamba et al. (2017)
Zhang, Ren, Liu, and Si (2017)
Sanders, Elangeswaran, and
Wulfsberg (2016)


Strategic options and creating
sustaining value


• How do big data analytics orientation and contextual
factors are driving the circular economy practices?


• Why do organizations retain strategic options (AI, ML, and
cloud) to support supply chain optimization and facilitation
of remanufacturing and recycling?


• How can the application of AI tools (machine learning,
predictive analytics, neural networks, and deep learning)
meaningfully inform management practices and increase
decision making effectiveness?


• What organizational capabilities impact on identifying
synergies and the potential for cooperation and alliance
building for the circular economy?


Kamble, Gunasekaran, and
Gawankar (2018)


Stock and Seliger (2016)
Wang et al. (2016)
Fosso Wamba, Akter, Edwards,
Chopin, and Gnanzou (2015)


14 AWAN ET AL.






perspective. Future research needs to study under what mechanism


(digital transformation capabilities or digital change) organizations'


readiness to change organizational innovation impacts. A future


research scholar may investigate the global knowledge integration and


organization structure impact on the firm-level innovation in the


Industry 4.0 context.


Our review reveals that implementing circular economy practices


across supply chain operations. Manufacturing firms have to consider


the external stakeholder's interests and adopt a view of stakeholders'


various interests. From our analysis, it is evident that Industry 4.0,


when in its early stages, the organization transition toward circular


economy linking Industry 4.0 should understand and prioritize stake-


holders' interest. Stakeholders expect that Industry 4.0 and circular


economy practices will actually meet their interests and thus perceive


Industry 4.0 as a moment for greening industries. Industry 4.0 tools


with circular economy business models with Industry 4.0 stakeholders'


interests and expectations would allow for better environmental inno-


vation solutions that support United Nations Sustainable Develop-


ment Goals (SDGs).


It will be interesting to investigate how AI and big data shape the


circular economy ecosystem and the consequences for product-


service system providers. Through big data and AI, the manufacturing


sector is enhanced because information on production, consumption


of material resources, product delivery, purchasing decisions, and the


best products to the customer at a particular area are readily available,


which provides informed decisions to management. It leads to devel-


oping package recycling planning and curbs waste generated from


materials, planning on which material to buy or not, which material is


readily available from the end of life products, tack logistics issues,


and set waste reduction targets. AI is expected to emerge as res-


haping circular economy practices.


Knowing the interest and expectations of different stakeholders


concerning the application of Industry 4.0 in the circular economy is


key to understanding how to control and optimize materials and


resource flow. This literature review highlights two critical findings. This


shows that value creation necessary embedded in the collaboration, IoT


application, and big data management capability is a part of easing


information exchange between firms and the end-users. Industry 4.0


technologies (IoT, big data, and robotics) can enhance the product's


circularity. Future research studies should explore the challenges of


customer involvement in designing a redistributed business model.


5.2.1 | Consequences of stakeholders interests
and expectations


As evidenced by our review, research on Industry 4.0 and circular


economy is developing rapidly than in other research domains. Still,


the implication of the development of new digital service business


models requires further validation. Our review reveals that a multi-


stakeholder perspective contributes to the emerging transition of


Industry 4.0 toward a circular economy. Kotler (2011) provides evi-


dence that companies can no longer operate as self-contained. Hence


incorporating the support, collaboration, and partnership of related


stakeholders may likely influence organizational performance


(Govindan & Hasanagic, 2018). Consistent with this line of thinking,


future research might examine how institutional stakeholders can sup-


port an effective and efficient circular economy. Future research


might also embrace the knowledge management fit perspective to


reveal external knowledge development and internal capabilities


affecting implementing the digitization (Industry 4.0 tools) and their


operational performance outcomes (de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018).


Because the IoT continues to update the devices' information,


these digital transformations are antecedent elements that impact


management decisions. These include sharing data, end-of-life prod-


uct information, type of the material used in the development of prod-


ucts among customers, and between different production units,


enhanced collaboration, and enabling options for circular economy


practices. However, a more in-depth understanding of the relationship


between institutional change and circular economy practices is still


necessary (Schulz et al., 2019) and in its infancy in many developing


countries.


Further, the literature review reveals that the organizational sup-


pliers' support paves a way forward for implementing the product-


take-back system, managing quality of raw material and end-of-life


products and enhancing reverse logistics means of product transpor-


tation. This literature analysis consisted of previous research findings


(Supino, Malandrino, Testa, & Sica, 2016; Zhu, Geng, & Lai, 2010).


Overall, we can posit that adopting a cooperative approach can


ensure a firm's long-term sustainable development agenda. Literature


has suggested that cooperation and collaboration with other indus-


tries can improve circular economy practices (Ghisellini et al., 2016).


Also, we see a need for future research to examine how stakeholders'


interests and expectations influence an organization's decision-making


style. This is consistent with the view that stakeholders signal the


organization to which circular economy initiatives and applications of


IoT are essential. Based on the interests and expectations of stake-


holders, the organization may alter its current production practices.


5.2.2 | Relationship between contextual
constraints and big data analytics capabilities


Our review of the literature finds evidence that few prior research


studies have paid particular attention to the implementation of digiti-


zation tools to support predictive maintenance, part recovery, and


minimize the failure of a part. Besides, the successful transition


toward a circular economy requires flexibility, adaptability, and big


data management capabilities (Gupta et al., 2019). Prior research has


widely assumed that the organization strives to adhere to business


intelligence due to disruptive technological innovation.


Big data analytics applications for the organization can play an


essential role in driving digital transformation and developing and


interpreting data insights for circular economy performance


(e.g., product design, development of product-to-service approaches,


and designing reverse logistic business models). Organizations engage


AWAN ET AL. 15






in developing data insights through their data analytics capabilities


and decision making with multiple stakeholders. Kim, Shin, and


Kwon (2012, p. 336) refer to big data management capability “as the
ability to handle routines in a structured (rather than ad hoc) manner


to manage IT resources following business needs and priorities.”
A big data perspective is the most frequently applied absorptive


capacity as internal organizational capability, and it features in some


publications. Some research studies focused on big data analytics, AI


in authentication, and misrepresentation of product information


(Li et al., 2017). We suggest that future research studies should focus


on investigating AI's application to an organization's ability to make


forecasting decisions and inform material mobilization, consumption,


and production patterns. The application of AI rarely appears in our


literature review. The disentanglement of different stakeholders'


impact on the decisions regarding the environment in operations


management constitutes an exciting future avenue (Vachon &


Klassen, 2007). In this context, research should investigate what


stakeholder expectations affect big data analytics's organizational


decision-making implementation. Much of previous research relies on


the influence of stakeholders on organizational performance. There is


an opportunity to expand research on how virtualization, decentraliza-


tion, and network building change the manufacturing landscape


(Brettel et al., 2014). Manufacturing firms tend to consider a circular


economy in response to consumer demands. For example, in the UK,


the consumer expects electronic retailers to have take-back options


for used goods (Balch, 2018).


Future research studies may examine various issues related to the


dynamic capability perspective. The other research avenues could


help firms develop a strategic fit between existing resources and fore-


cast future demands. Despite these contributions, IoT remains to need


to be addressed for this area to headway advanced (Alcayaga


et al., 2019; Pagoropoulos et al., 2017). The transformation from a lin-


ear to a circular economy in the manufacturing firms introduces new


management challenges.


Stakeholders have to focus on applying big data analytics capabili-


ties that lead firms through this transition successfully, whereas


Gunasekaran et al. (2017) and Dubey et al. (2017) explicitly acknowl-


edge and tested empirically big data predictive analytics impact on


organizational performance and sustainability performance, respec-


tively. Thus, an empirical investigation of how organizational absorp-


tive capabilities affect the relationship between big data management


capabilities and its impact on business analytics capabilities, decision


making styles would be essential to test the casual relationship.


5.2.3 | Impact of big data analytics on intelligent
manufacturing


Big data is a highly complex notion to describe, define, and under-


stand. Big data is often defined as “often used to describe massive,
complex, and real-time streaming data that require sophisticated man-


agement, analytical, and processing techniques to extract insights”
(Laney, 2012). Big data concept “includes include a variety (structured


or unstructured data formats), velocity (the speed at which data are


created) and veracity (messiness of data) and value (the previously


unknown insights)” (Davenport, 2014). Previous research frequently
examines big data analytics as a circular economy (Gupta et al., 2019).


Intelligent manufacturing is considered one of the facilitators of a


circular economy that drives whole value chain activities toward sus-


tainability (Zhong et al., 2017). For example, Rajput and Singh (2019a)


argued that the introduction of Industry 4.0 technology to their oper-


ations might help overcome circular economy challenges. The review


uncovers various issues, and several insights can be gained from the


Industry 4.0 perspective and the recognition that there are many


unexplored avenues ready for future research. Except for a few stud-


ies, for example, Kerin and Pham (2019), little is known about how a


shift toward intelligent manufacturing technologies affects the firm as


existing circular economy practices and its underlying organizational


big data management capabilities. Future research might also address


what the contingent big data analytics capabilities that influence deci-


sion making styles to optimize production and produce increasingly


individualized products with a short lead time to market and higher


quality (Zhong et al., 2017) are.


Big data analytics framework might serve as a solution to intelli-


gent manufacturing because intelligent manufacturing holds the


promise of increased customization, flexibility, and better quality and


improved product (Zhong et al., 2017). The organization should


emphasize prioritizing different competing demands at achieving a cir-


cular economy and IoT outcomes that deliver a specific, more holistic


value to particular stakeholders. Given the importance of Big Data


Analytics Orientation (BDAO; Hyun, Hosoya, & Kamioka, 2018), it


seems worthwhile to explore how BDAOs affect the organizational


business intelligence and organization performance. BDAO refers to


prioritizing and identifying data management capabilities and generat-


ing insights to solve organizational problems.


As the literature review provides evidence, there is little research


on customer or supplier integration as a big data analyst and its effect


on firm performance outcomes. The application of Industry 4.0 pro-


vides firms an opportunity to eliminate waste in production by identi-


fying unnecessary activities (Buer et al., 2018). However, a transition


to embed a close-loop-supply model through big data analytics to


identify end-of-life products and their collection is a significant new


frontier for the circular economy. The literature analysis reveals that


there is still a need to realize the benefits of big data analytics from


Industry 4.0, including cocreation and expansion of the circular econ-


omy. Additionally, no research studies investigating what big data ana-


lytics capabilities and AI management capabilities are needed for


successful Industry 4.0 transformations. The IoT applications in the


circular economy is underutilized. There is a lack of research studies


that have been carried out regarding the implementation of Industry


4.0 in resource conservation and recycling.


Therefore, big data analytics and circular economy capabilities are


additional directions for future research focused on driving sustain-


able manufacturing. This evidence supports big data analytics as inter-


vening variables that link data management capabilities and circular


economy performance. Based on our literature review, it appears that


16 AWAN ET AL.






big data analytics is a salient predictor of a circular economy. How-


ever, prior research in this area has given less focus on its role in


decision making for the circular economy.


5.2.4 | Strategic options and creating sustaining
value


As evidenced by our review, few antecedent studies create value in


the circular economy (Ranta, Aarikka-Stenroos, & Mäkinen, 2018). It is


clear from the literature review that many research studies propose


IoT applications' challenges and benefits. There are few studies


regarding Industry 4.0 requirements for embedding the supply chain's


circular economy (Manavalan & Jayakrishna, 2019). Much of the prior


research has focused on digitalization as an enabler of the circular


economy (Antikainen, Uusitalo, & Kivikytö-Reponen, 2018). We see


the opportunity to the extent of the research using a digitalization


context to study circular economy implementation practices.


A recent literature review of assessing the relationship between


Industry 4.0 and circular economy has highlighted the business


model's usefulness for creating value, generating revenue, and reduc-


ing cost within the industrial context (Rosa et al., 2020). Future


research studies are needed to examine the relationship between the


digital business strategy alignment impacts organizational and techno-


logical innovation. There is a lack of research on how the changing


digital environment may impact the development of knowledge man-


agement capability and enhance green innovation (Awan, Nauman, &


Sroufe, 2020).


As our literature review highlights the transformation of critical


activities and resources to capture value, it requires specific capabili-


ties and dynamic processes. The core elements salient in collective


value creation and individual value appropriation are pursued, such as


collaboration between competitors within the same relationship


(Ritala & Hurmelinna-Laukkanen, 2009). For example, they realize the


importance of collaboration for IoT. Realizing the requirement for an


IoT approach, leading manufacturing companies started to develop


the industrial internet consortium in 2014 to expedite the advance-


ment, adoption, and widely accepted use of IoT.


The value proposition of the business model consists of the provi-


sion of continuous connectivity. The continuous connectivity of the


internet and the transformation of data is essential. Value creation


comes from collaboration and critical information technology manage-


ment capabilities. Value creation and value appropriation research


have shown that firms should simultaneously follow their strategic


objective as individual entities to achieve goals (Ritala &


Tidström, 2014). However, the underlying mechanism by which value


creation and value appropriation occur remains an ongoing debate


(Morgan, Anokhin, & Wincent, 2017). Although value creation takes


on the interfirm networks ranging from supply chain to innovation,


value appropriation takes place on the firm level and leads to interfirm


networks (Möller & Rajala, 2007). There is evidence in the literature


that IoT facilitates real-time data generation and transfer of events


(Arunachalam, Kumar, & Kawalek, 2018). Different IoT types, such as


RFID, sensors, and electronic data exchange, enhance collaboration


and communication (Arunachalam et al., 2018). Information technol-


ogy data management plays a key position role in the development of


value proposition and value creation.


Future research should investigate to what extent the application


of AI tools could guide future research, such as product delivery, prod-


uct recovery, and predictive maintenance. AI is defined by Kaplan and


Haenlein (2019, p. 17) “as a system's ability to interpret external data
correctly, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to


achieve specific goals and tasks through flexible adaptation.” Further-
more, AI tools such as machine learning (ML), predictive analytics,


neural networks, and in-depth learning help solve many complex rela-


tionships in material management planning and operations. Future


research can examine management's role in developing AI programs;


such research might examine how to improve AI engagement in devel-


oping value cocreation for actors involved in decision making. An


almost unmarked area is the application of AI in circular economy


research.


Kaplan and Haenlein (2019, p. 17) defined ML as a “system's abil-
ity to perceive data (e.g., natural language processing or voice/image


recognition) or to control, move, and manipulate objects based on


learned information, be it a robot or another connected device.” At
the operational level, ML can identify the risk of hazardous material,


maintenance time, and designing an appropriate manufacturing pro-


cess. Our review highlights that Industry 4.0 stakeholder interest and


expectations are rendering as a way forward to suggest data collected


from various sources, such as IoT, can be used to develop ML models.


IoT allows different networks to connect and to get the full benefits


of Industry 4.0 solutions. IoT is a relatively new phenomenon and can


apply in every industry field; its real benefits are infinite and


unknown yet.


IIoT, Industry 4.0, and industrial internet terms are used


interchangeably in the literature. IoT is not only about including inter-


connected smart interferences technology that connects and commu-


nicates to create value to their users and to offer new technical


solutions. It is not always the IIoT benefit of new solutions due to data


privacy and security issues. The application of IoT in manufacturing


industries is known as a smart factory or Industry 4.0. The IIoT is


mainly known as machine-to-machine communication and is con-


nected through some centralized system to automatically respond to


problems without human intervention.


The idea behind the IIoT Industry 4.0 is to reduce the operational


cost, focus on predictive maintenance, and to increase automation


where possible. IIoT plays a crucial role in value creation as the IoT


has changed how many firms communicate and conduct business.


Simultaneously, the IIoT business model is receiving interest in the


manufacturing firms and is becoming a significant area of future


research inquiry. However, there how the IoT creates value has


received little interest. Thus, there is a need for detailed studies of the


value creation process in the presence of the IoT. The existence of


many IIoT tools and IoT requires inquiries into the value creation deci-


sion process. This approach requires to focus on qualitative research


studies to understand more complexities inherited in the use of IoT.


AWAN ET AL. 17






6 | CONCLUSION


This study provides a systematic review of the IoT and circular econ-


omy literature to highlight the relevance of stakeholders' interests and


expectations and outline a future research agenda. We explore how


stakeholder's (Institutions, Suppliers, and International organization's)


interests and expectations can be conceptualized by performing a sys-


tematic literature review of IoT and circular economy-related


research. The contribution of this study is twofold. First, the stake-


holders' interests and expectations aim to serve as a reference point


to start a discussion toward IoT and circular economy ecosystem-


oriented perspective and, second, to propose a discussion on existing


research and identify the future research areas.


We believe that linking the interests and expectations of Industry


4.0 stakeholders could open new fruitful research areas. These areas


include but are not limited to enriching academic discourse in Industry


4.0 and circular economy domains of strategic management research


and contribute to the ongoing debate in circular economy business


model implementations. Our reviews suggest that it would be particu-


larly valuable to anticipate interest and acknowledging expectations


to apply appropriate methods for a successful transformation toward


a circular economy and Industry 4.0. We expect that stakeholders'


interests and expectations have the potential to shape an organiza-


tion's strategy for stakeholder orientations.


Industry 4.0 has become a salient route for firms to gain sustain-


able development advantage. Of all the advancements in technology,


IoT can have profound implications for the circular economy. The pre-


sent study limits itself to journal articles published between 2006 to


2019, and thus, there might be other insightful studies before this


year. Therefore, circular economy managers and practitioners must


develop an IoT with AI tools to accurately predict material usage, pro-


duction, and requirements.


To date, empirical evidence of integrating IoT with circular econ-


omy practices is at an early stage. For managers, Industry 4.0 tools


(IoT, CBM, and CPS) could develop a product-service business model


and support more circular economy initiatives. Before implementing


circular economy practices, managers must understand conflicting


interests and expectations of multistakeholders on the execution of


different Industry 4.0 tools. The potential benefits of incorporating


Industry 4.0 tools in production systems require identifying and exam-


ining stakeholders' interests and expectations when implementing


circular economy initiatives.


Our analysis shows that existing literature, either concurrently or


independently, discusses the circular economy and IoT from an


Industry 4.0 perspective. The significance of the global value chain is


well documented in terms of theoretical and empirical contexts.


The Industry 4.0 and global value chain literature that has emerged


to date primarily address productivity improvement and value


cocreation and understand customer needs and improvements in


operational performance (Strange & Zucchella, 2017; Tortorella &


Fettermann, 2018). Future research studies should explore how


Industry 4.0 and the circular economy together support the gover-


nance value chain.


There have been little or no empirical research or literature


review studies on the interface between Industry 4.0, circular econ-


omy, and global value chain. There is the continuing importance of


stakeholders' interest in addressing the circular economy's critical


issues. Therefore, we can see a growing importance for understanding


the necessary technology infrastructure required for organizations to


respond to changing Industry 4.0 business requirements.


This study offers several implications for managers and practi-


tioners. To this end, we can see an evolution in the field toward long-


term policies developed on reuse, remanufacturing, and recycling so


that firms can strategically plan resource allocation and core capabili-


ties. However, at a country level, few grasp the amount of interest in


the circular economy and Industry 4.0 and are unsure of what action


to take. Now is an excellent time to develop reuse and recycling


implementation practices within global value chain management. The


technology is available to entire industries to enable circular econo-


mies and a new wave of industry innovation. When developing poli-


cies and thinking about their implications, policymakers need to


engage a broad group of stakeholders. When doing so, firms will need


to be included in the process to decide on where and how they fit


within closed-loop supply chains. Finally, we suggested that compa-


nies involve regulatory stakeholders in developing circular economy


strategies. Doing so can result in better firm-level strategies while


providing appropriate feedback mechanisms to policymakers for a


resilient circular economy enabled by Industry 4.0 innovation.


REFERENCES


Alcayaga, A., Wiener, M., & Hansen, E. G. (2019). Towards a framework of
smart-circular systems: An integrative literature review. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 221, 622–634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2019.02.085


Alonso-Almeida, M. D. M., Rodríguez-Antón, J. M., Bagur-Femenías, L., &
Perramon, J. (2020). Sustainable development and circular economy:
The role of institutional promotion on circular consumption and mar-
ket competitiveness from a multistakeholder engagement approach.
Business Strategy and the Environment, 29, 2803–2814. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bse.2544


Andoni, M., Robu, V., Flynn, D., Abram, S., Geach, D., Jenkins, D., …
Peacock, A. (2019). Blockchain technology in the energy sector: A
systematic review of challenges and opportunities. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 100, 143–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2018.10.014


Antikainen, M., Uusitalo, T., & Kivikytö-Reponen, P. (2018). Digitalisation
as an enabler of circular economy. Procedia CIRP, 73, 45–49. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.04.027


Arunachalam, D., Kumar, N., & Kawalek, J. P. (2018). Understanding big
data analytics capabilities in supply chain management: Unravelling
the issues, challenges, and implications for practice. Transportation
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 114, 416–436.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2017.04.001


Asdecker, B., & Felch, V. (2018). Development of an Industry 4.0 maturity
model for the delivery process in supply chains. Journal of Modelling in
Management, 13(4), 840–883. https://doi.org/10.1108/JM2-03-2018-
0042


Awan, U., Kraslawski, A., & Huiskonen, J. (2018). Governing interfirm
relationships for social sustainability: The relationship between gover-
nance mechanisms. Sustainable Collaboration, and Cultural Intelligence,
10(12), 4473. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10124473


18 AWAN ET AL.



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.085









https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.085

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2544

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2544

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.10.014

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.10.014

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.04.027

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.04.027

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2017.04.001

https://doi.org/10.1108/JM2-03-2018-0042

https://doi.org/10.1108/JM2-03-2018-0042

https://doi.org/10.3390/su10124473




Awan, U., Nauman, S., & Sroufe, R. (2020). Exploring the effect of buyer
engagement on green product innovation: Empirical evidence from
manufacturers. Business Strategy and the Environment. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bse.2631


Bachér, J., Pihkola, H., Kujanpää, L., & Mroueh, U.-M. (2018). Advancing
the circular economy through group decision-making and stakeholder
involvement. Detritus: Multidisciplinary Journal for Waste Resources &
Residues, 4, 22–35. https://doi.org/10.31025/2611-4135/2018.13741


Bakker, S., Maat, K., & van Wee, B. (2014). Stakeholders interests, expec-
tations, and strategies regarding the development and implementation
of electric vehicles: The case of the Netherlands. Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 66(1), 52–64. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.tra.2014.04.018


Balch, O. (2018). Is the circular economy an untapped business
opportunity?


Barreiro-Gen, M., & Lozano, R. (2020). How circular is the circular econ-
omy? Analysing the implementation of circular economy in organisa-
tions. Business Strategy and the Environment, 29, 3484–3494. https://
doi.org/10.1002/bse.2590


Betancourt Morales, C. M., & Zartha Sossa, J. W. (2020). Circular economy
in Latin America: A systematic literature review. Business Strategy and
the Environment, 29, 2479–2497. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2515


Bienhaus, F., & Haddud, A. (2018). Procurement 4.0: Factors influencing
the digitisation of procurement and supply chains. Business Process
Management Journal, 24(4), 965–984. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-
06-2017-0139


Bonilla, S. H., Silva, H. R. O., da Silva, M. T., Gonçalves, R. F., &
Sacomano, J. B. (2018). Industry 4.0 and sustainability implications: A
scenario-based analysis of the impacts and challenges. Sustainability
(Switzerland), 10(10), 3740. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10103740


Boyes, H., Hallaq, B., Cunningham, J., & Watson, T. (2018). The industrial
internet of things (IIoT): An analysis framework. Computers in Industry,
101, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.04.015


Brauer, M., & Wiersema, M. (2018). Analyzing analyst research: A
review of past coverage and recommendations for future research.
Journal of Management, 44(1), 218–248. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0149206317734900


Bressanelli, G., Adrodegari, F., Perona, M., & Saccani, N. (2018). Exploring
how usage-focused business models enable circular economy through
digital technologies. Sustainability (Switzerland), 10(3), 639. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su10030639


Brettel, M., Friederichsen, N., Keller, M., & Rosenberg, M. (2014). How
virtualization, decentralization and network building change the
manufacturing landscape: An Industry 4.0 perspective. International
Journal of Mechanical, Industrial Science and Engineering, 8(1), 37–44.


Buer, S. V., Strandhagen, J. O., & Chan, F. T. S. (2018). The link between
Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing: Mapping current research and
establishing a research agenda. International Journal of Production
Research, 56(8), 2924–2940. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2018.1442945


Castelo-Branco, I., Cruz-Jesus, F., & Oliveira, T. (2019). Assessing Industry
4.0 readiness in manufacturing: Evidence for the European Union.
Computers in Industry, 107, 22–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.
2019.01.007


Centobelli, P., Cerchione, R., Chiaroni, D., Del Vecchio, P., & Urbinati, A.
(2020). Designing business models in circular economy: A systematic
literature review and research agenda. Business Strategy and the Envi-
ronment, 29(4), 1734–1749. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2466


Cezarino, L. O., Liboni, L. B., Oliveira Stefanelli, N., Oliveira, B. G., &
Stocco, L. C. (2019). Diving into emerging economies bottleneck:
Industry 4.0 and implications for circular economy. Management Deci-
sion. https://doi.org/10.1108/MD-10-2018-1084


Charnley, F., Tiwari, D., Hutabarat, W., Moreno, M., Okorie, O., &
Tiwari, A. (2019). Simulation to enable a data-driven circular economy.
Sustainability, 11(12), 3379. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11123379


Chauhan, C., Sharma, A., & Singh, A. (2019). A SAP-LAP linkages frame-
work for integrating Industry 4.0 and circular economy. Benchmarking:
An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-10-2018-0310


Chuang, C.-H., Lee, D.-H., Chang, W.-J., Weng, W.-C., Shaikh, M. O., &
Huang, C.-L. (2017). Real-time monitoring via patch-type piezoelectric
force sensors for internet of things based logistics. IEEE Sensors Journal,
17(8), 2498–2506. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2017.2665653


Chuang, C.-H., Wang, C. X., & Zhao, Y. (2014). Closed-loop supply chain
models for a high-tech product under alternative reverse channel and
collection cost structures. International Journal of Production Economics,
156, 108–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.05.008


Dalenogare, L. S., Benitez, G. B., Ayala, N. F., & Frank, A. G. (2018). The
expected contribution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial per-
formance. International Journal of Production Economics, 204, 383–394.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.08.019


Daú, G., Scavarda, A., Scavarda, L. F., & Portugal, V. J. T. (2019). The
healthcare sustainable supply chain 4.0: The circular economy transi-
tion conceptual framework with the corporate social responsibility
mirror. Sustainability (Switzerland), 11(12), 3259. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su11123259


Davenport, T. (2014). Big data at work: Dispelling the myths, uncovering the
opportunities. Brighton, USA: Harvard Business Review Press. https://
doi.org/10.15358/9783800648153


de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., Jabbour, C. J. C., Godinho Filho, M., &
Roubaud, D. (2018). Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: A pro-
posed research agenda and original roadmap for sustainable opera-
tions. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 273–286.


Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., Sethi, S. P., & Sokolov, B. (2019). Scheduling in pro-
duction, supply chain and Industry 4.0 systems by optimal control:
Fundamentals, state-of-the-art and applications. International Journal
of Production Research, 57(2), 411–432. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2018.1442948


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., & Fosso
Wamba, S. (2017). World class sustainable supply chain management:
Critical review and further research directions. The International Jour-
nal of Logistics Management, 28(2), 332–362. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJLM-07-2015-0112


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z.,
Wamba, S. F., & Roubaud, D. (2017). Can big data and predictive ana-
lytics improve social and environmental sustainability? Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 144, 534–545.


Esposito, M. (2017). Where the circular economy meets the internet of
things. Retrieved August 12, 2020, from https://www.greenbiz.com/
article/where-circular-economy-meets-internet-things


European Commision (2012). Roadmap 2050. Policy, 1–9. https://doi.org/
10.2833/10759


European Commission (2008). Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on Waste and
Repealing Certain Directives.


Ferguson, M., Guide, V. D. R. Jr., & Souza, G. C. (2006). Supply chain coor-
dination for false failure returns. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 8(4), 376–393. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.
0112


Fosso Wamba, S., Akter, S., Edwards, A., Chopin, G., & Gnanzou, D. (2015).
How “big data” can make big impact: Findings from a systematic
review and a longitudinal case study. International Journal of Production
Economics, 165, 234–246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.031


Franciosi, C., Lambiase, A., & Miranda, S. (2017). Sustainable maintenance:
A periodic preventive maintenance model with sustainable spare parts
management. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 50(1), 13692–13697. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.2536


Frank, A. G., Dalenogare, L. S., & Ayala, N. F. (2019). Industry 4.0 technolo-
gies: Implementation patterns in manufacturing companies. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics, 210, 15–26. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.004


AWAN ET AL. 19



https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2631

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2631

https://doi.org/10.31025/2611-4135/2018.13741

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2014.04.018

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2014.04.018

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2590

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2590

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2515

https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-06-2017-0139

https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-06-2017-0139

https://doi.org/10.3390/su10103740

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.04.015

https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206317734900

https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206317734900

https://doi.org/10.3390/su10030639

https://doi.org/10.3390/su10030639

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1442945

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1442945

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.01.007

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.01.007

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2466

https://doi.org/10.1108/MD-10-2018-1084

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11123379

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-10-2018-0310

https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2017.2665653

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.05.008

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.08.019

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11123259

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11123259

https://doi.org/10.15358/9783800648153

https://doi.org/10.15358/9783800648153

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1442948

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1442948

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-07-2015-0112

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-07-2015-0112

https://www.greenbiz.com/article/where-circular-economy-meets-internet-things

https://www.greenbiz.com/article/where-circular-economy-meets-internet-things

https://doi.org/10.2833/10759

https://doi.org/10.2833/10759

https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.0112

https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.0112

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.031

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.2536

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.2536

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.004




Garcia-Muiña, F. E., González-Sánchez, R., Ferrari, A. M., Volpi, L., Pini, M.,
Siligardi, C., & Settembre-Blundo, D. (2019). Identifying the equilibrium
point between sustainability goals and circular economy practices in
an Industry 4.0 manufacturing context using eco-design. Social
Sciences, 8(8), 241. https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci8080241


Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M. P., & Hultink, E. J. (2017). The
circular economy—A new sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner
Production, 143, 757–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.
12.048


Genovese, A., Acquaye, A. A., Figueroa, A., & Koh, S. C. L. (2017). Sustain-
able supply chain management and the transition towards a circular
economy: Evidence and some applications. Omega, 66, 344–357.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2015.05.015


Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., & Ulgiati, S. (2016). A review on circular economy:
The expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and
economic systems. Journal of Cleaner Production, 114, 11–32. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007


Golinska-Dawson, P. (2018). Sustainability in remanufacturing process—
The challenges for its assessment. In P. Golinska-Dawson, & F. Kübler
(Eds.), Sustainability in remanufacturing operations (pp. 1–12). Cham:
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-60355-1_1


Govindan, K., & Hasanagic, M. (2018). A systematic review on drivers,
barriers, and practices towards circular economy: A supply chain
perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2),
278–311. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1402141


Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., & Kannan, D. (2015). Reverse logistics and
closed-loop supply chain: A comprehensive review to explore the
future. European Journal of Operational Research, 240(3), 603–626.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.07.012


Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Childe, S. J.,
Hazen, B., & Akter, S. (2017). Big data and predictive analytics for sup-
ply chain and organizational performance. Journal of Business Research,
70, 308–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.004


Gupta, S., Chen, H., Hazen, B. T., Kaur, S., & Santibañez Gonzalez, E. D. R.
(2019). Circular economy and big data analytics: A stakeholder per-
spective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 144, 466–474.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.06.030


Hernández-Muñoz, J. M., Vercher, J. B., Muñoz, L., Galache, J. A.,
Presser, M., Gómez, L. A. H., & Pettersson, J. (2011). Smart cities at
the forefront of the future internet. In The future internet assembly
(pp. 447–462). Heidelberg, Dordrecht, London, New York: Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20898-0


Hofmann, E., & Rüsch, M. (2017). Industry 4.0 and the current status as
well as future prospects on logistics. Computers in Industry, 89, 23–34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002


Hofmann, F., & Jaeger-Erben, M. (2020). Organizational transition manage-
ment of circular business model innovations. Business Strategy and the
Environment, 29, 2770–2788. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2542


Hyun, Y., Hosoya, R., & Kamioka, T. (2018). The implications of big data
analytics orientation upon deployment. In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national Conference on Information Technology: IoT and Smart City
(pp. 42–48). New York, NY, United States: Association for Computing
Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3301551.3301566


Ingemarsdotter, E., Jamsin, E., & Balkenende, R. (2020). Opportunities and
challenges in IoT-enabled circular business model implementation—A
case study. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 162, 105047.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105047


Kagermann, H., Helbig, J., Hellinger, A., & Wahlster, W. (2013). Recom-
mendations for implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0:
Securing the future of German manufacturing industry; final report of
the Industries 4.0 Working Group. Forschungsunion.


Kagermann, H., Lukas, W. D., & Wahlster, W. (2011). Industrie 4.0: Mit
dem internet der dinge auf dem weg zur 4. Industriellen revolution.
VDI Nachrichten, 13(1).


Kalmykova, Y., Sadagopan, M., & Rosado, L. (2017). Circular economy—
From review of theories and practices to development of implementa-
tion tools. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 135, 190–201.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.10.034


Kamble, S. S., Gunasekaran, A., & Gawankar, S. A. (2018). Sustainable
Industry 4.0 framework: A systematic literature review identifying the
current trends and future perspectives. Process Safety and Environmen-
tal Protection, 117, 408–425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.
05.009


Kang, H. S., Lee, J. Y., Choi, S., Kim, H., Park, J. H., Son, J. Y., & Do Noh, S.
(2016). Smart manufacturing: Past research, present findings, and
future directions. International Journal of Precision Engineering and
Manufacturing-Green Technology, 3(1), 111–128. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40684-016-0015-5


Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2019). Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who's the fairest
in the land? On the interpretations, illustrations, and implications of
artificial intelligence. Business Horizons, 62(1), 15–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bushor.2018.08.004


Kerin, M., & Pham, D. T. (2019). A review of emerging industry 4.0 tech-
nologies in remanufacturing. Journal of Cleaner Production, 237,
117805. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.117805


Kim, G., Shin, B., & Kwon, O. (2012). Investigating the value of
sociomaterialism in conceptualizing IT capability of a firm. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 29(3), 327–362. https://doi.org/10.
2753/MIS0742-1222290310


Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. (2017). Conceptualizing the circular
economy: An analysis of 114 definitions. Resources, Conservation and
Recycling, 127, 221–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.
09.005


Kotler, P. (2011). Reinventing marketing to manage the environmental
imperative. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 132–135. https://doi.org/10.
1509/jmkg.75.4.132


Koutsos, T. M., Menexes, G. C., & Dordas, C. A. (2019). An efficient frame-
work for conducting systematic literature reviews in agricultural sci-
ences. Science of the Total Environment, 682, 106–117. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.354


Kusiak, A. (2019). Fundamentals of smart manufacturing: A multi-thread
perspective. Annual Reviews in Control, 47, 214–220. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.02.001


Laney, D. (2012). The importance of “big data”: A definition. Stamford, CT,
USA: Gartner.


Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H.-G., Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Indus-
try 4.0. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 6(4), 239–242.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-014-0334-4


Li, X., Li, D., Wan, J., Vasilakos, A. V., Lai, C.-F., & Wang, S. (2017). A review
of industrial wireless networks in the context of industry 4.0. Wireless
Networks, 23(1), 23–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-015-1133-7


Lieder, M., Asif, F. M. A., Rashid, A., Mihelič, A., & Kotnik, S. (2017).
Towards circular economy implementation in manufacturing systems
using a multi-method simulation approach to link design and business
strategy. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology,
93(5–8), 1953–1970. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-0610-9


Lieder, M., & Rashid, A. (2016). Towards circular economy implementation:
A comprehensive review in context of manufacturing industry. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 115, 36–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2015.12.042


Lin, K. Y. (2018). User experience-based product design for smart produc-
tion to empower industry 4.0 in the glass recycling circular economy.
Computers and Industrial Engineering, 125, 729–738. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2018.06.023


Linder, M., & Williander, M. (2017). Circular business model innovation:
Inherent uncertainties. Business Strategy and the Environment, 26(2),
182–196. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.1906


Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, A. B., Rojas Luiz, J. V., Rojas Luiz, O.,
Jabbour, C. J. C., Ndubisi, N. O., Caldeira de Oliveira, J. H., &


20 AWAN ET AL.



https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci8080241

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2015.05.015

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60355-1_1

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60355-1_1

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1402141

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.07.012

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.06.030

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20898-0

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2542

https://doi.org/10.1145/3301551.3301566

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105047

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.10.034

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.05.009

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.05.009

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40684-016-0015-5

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40684-016-0015-5

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.08.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.08.004

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.117805

https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222290310

https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222290310

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005

https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.75.4.132

https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.75.4.132

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.354

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.354

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.02.001

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.02.001

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-014-0334-4

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-015-1133-7

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-0610-9

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.12.042

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.12.042

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.06.023

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.06.023

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.1906




Junior, F. H. (2019). Circular economy business models and operations
management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 235, 1525–1539. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.349


Luiz Mattos Nascimento, D., Alencastro, V., Luiz Gonçalves Quelhas, O.,
Goyannes Gusm~ao Caiado, R., Arturo Garza-Reyes, J., Rocha
Lona, L., & Tortorella, G. (2018). Exploring Industry 4.0 technologies to
enable circular economy practices in a manufacturing context: A
business model proposal article information. Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management, 30(3), 607–627. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JMTM-03-2018-0071


MacArthur, E. (2013). Towards the circular economy: Opportunities for the
consumer goods sector. UK: Ellen MacArthur Foundation.


Majeed, A. A., & Rupasinghe, T. D. (2017). Internet of things (IoT) embed-
ded future supply chains for industry 4.0: An assessment from an ERP-
based fashion apparel and footwear industry. International Journal of
Supply Chain Management, 6(1), 25–40.


Manavalan, E., & Jayakrishna, K. (2019). A review of internet of things
(IoT) embedded sustainable supply chain for industry 4.0 require-
ments. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 127(November 2018),
925–953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030


Manyika, J., Chui, M., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Bisson, P., & Marrs, A. (2013).
Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and
the global economy (Vol. 180). USA: McKinsey Global Institute San
Francisco, CA.


Marques, M., Agostinho, C., Zacharewicz, G., & Jardim-Gonçalves, R.
(2017). Decentralized decision support for intelligent manufacturing
in industry 4.0. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments,
9(3), 299–313. https://doi.org/10.3233/AIS-170436


Martín-Gómez, A., Aguayo-González, F., & Luque, A. (2019). A holonic
framework for managing the sustainable supply chain in emerging
economies with smart connected metabolism. Resources, Conservation
and Recycling, 141, 219–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.
2018.10.035


Mathews, J. A., & Tan, H. (2011). Progress toward a circular economy in
China: The drivers (and inhibitors) of eco-industrial initiative. Journal of
Industrial Ecology, 15(3), 435–457. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
9290.2011.00332.x


Mihelcic, J. R., Crittenden, J. C., Small, M. J., Shonnard, D. R.,
Hokanson, D. R., Zhang, Q., … Schnoor, J. L. (2003). Sustainability sci-
ence and engineering: The emergence of a new metadiscipline. Envi-
ronmental Science and Technology, 37(23), 5314–5324. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es034605h


Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2009). Preferred
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRI-
SMA statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(4), 264–269. https://
doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135


Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & Prisma Group (2009).
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses:
The PRISMA statement. PLoS Med, 6(7), e1000097.


Möller, K., & Rajala, A. (2007). Rise of strategic nets—New modes of value
creation. Industrial Marketing Management, 36(7), 895–908. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2007.05.016


Moore, M., (2019). What is Industry 4.0? Everything you need to know.
TechRadar. November 5. retrieved from https://www.techradar.com/
news/what-is-industry-40-everything-you-need-to-know


Morgan, T., Anokhin, S., & Wincent, J. (2017). When the fog dissipates:
The choice between value creation and value appropriation in a partner
as a function of information asymmetry. Journal of Business Research, 88,
498–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.11.032


Munn, Z., Stern, C., Aromataris, E., Lockwood, C., & Jordan, Z. (2018).
What kind of systematic review should I conduct? A proposed typol-
ogy and guidance for systematic reviewers in the medical and health
sciences. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 18(1), 1–9.


Murray, A., Skene, K., & Haynes, K. (2017). The circular economy: An inter-
disciplinary exploration of the concept and application in a global


context. Journal of Business Ethics, 140(3), 369–380. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2


Nascimento, D. L. M., Alencastro, V., Quelhas, O. L. G., Caiado, R. G. G.,
Garza-Reyes, J. A., Lona, L. R., & Tortorella, G. (2019). Exploring Indus-
try 4.0 technologies to enable circular economy practices in a
manufacturing context: A business model proposal. Journal of
Manufacturing Technology Management, 30(3), 607–627. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JMTM-03-2018-0071


Nobre, G. C., & Tavares, E. (2017). Scientific literature analysis on big data
and internet of things applications on circular economy: A bibliometric
study. Scientometrics, 111(1), 463–492. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11192-017-2281-6


Nord, J. H., Koohang, A., & Paliszkiewicz, J. (2019). The internet of
things: Review and theoretical framework. Expert Systems with
Applications, 133, 97–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.
05.014


Okoli, C., & Schabram, K. (2010). A guide to conducting a systematic litera-
ture review of information systems research. 10(26). http://sprouts.
aisnet.org/10-26


Okorie, O., Salonitis, K., Charnley, F., Moreno, M., Turner, C., & Tiwari, A.
(2018). Digitisation and the circular economy: A review of current
research and future trends. Energies, 11(11), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.
3390/en11113009


Pagoropoulos, A., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017). The emer-
gent role of digital technologies in the circular economy: A review.
Procedia CIRP, 64, 19–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.
02.047


Park, S. (2016). Development of innovative strategies for the Korean
manufacturing industry by use of the connected smart factory (CSF).
Procedia Computer Science, 91(Itqm), 744–750. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.procs.2016.07.067


Parmar, B. L., Freeman, R. E., Harrison, J. S., Wicks, A. C., de Purnell, L., &
De Colle, S. (2010). Stakeholder theory: The state of the art. Academy
of Management Annals, 4(1), 403–445.


Perey, R., Benn, S., Agarwal, R., & Edwards, M. (2018). The place of waste:
Changing business value for the circular economy. Business Strategy
and the Environment, 27(5), 631–642. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.
2068


Qian, F., Zhong, W., & Du, W. (2017). Fundamental theories and key tech-
nologies for smart and optimal manufacturing in the process industry.
Engineering, 3(2), 154–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.
02.011


Rajput, S., & Singh, S. P. (2019a). Connecting circular economy and Indus-
try 4.0. International Journal of Information Management, 49, 98–113.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.002


Rajput, S., & Singh, S. P. (2019b). Industry 4.0—Challenges to implement
circular economy. Benchmarking: An International Journal. https://doi.
org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2018-0430


Ranta, V., Aarikka-Stenroos, L., & Mäkinen, S. J. (2018). Creating value in
the circular economy: A structured multiple-case analysis of business
models. Journal of Cleaner Production, 201, 988–1000. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.072


Reinhard, G., Jesper, V., & Stefan, S. (2016). Industry 4.0: Building the digi-
tal enterprise. 2016 Global Industry 4.0 Survey, 1(1), 1–39.


Ritala, P., & Hurmelinna-Laukkanen, P. (2009). What's in it for me?
Creating and appropriating value in innovation-related coopetition.
Technovation, 29(12), 819–828. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.
2009.07.002


Ritala, P., & Tidström, A. (2014). Untangling the value-creation and
value-appropriation elements of coopetition strategy: A longitudinal
analysis on the firm and relational levels. Scandinavian Journal of Man-
agement, 30(4), 498–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2014.
05.002


Rosa, P., Sassanelli, C., Urbinati, A., Chiaroni, D., & Terzi, S. (2020).
Assessing relations between circular economy and Industry 4.0: A


AWAN ET AL. 21



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.349

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.349

https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-03-2018-0071

https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-03-2018-0071

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030

https://doi.org/10.3233/AIS-170436

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.10.035

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.10.035

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2011.00332.x

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2011.00332.x

https://doi.org/10.1021/es034605h

https://doi.org/10.1021/es034605h

https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135

https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2007.05.016

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2007.05.016

https://www.techradar.com/news/what-is-industry-40-everything-you-need-to-know

https://www.techradar.com/news/what-is-industry-40-everything-you-need-to-know

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.11.032

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2

https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-03-2018-0071

https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-03-2018-0071

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2281-6

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2281-6

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.05.014

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.05.014

http://sprouts.aisnet.org/10-26

http://sprouts.aisnet.org/10-26

https://doi.org/10.3390/en11113009

https://doi.org/10.3390/en11113009

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.02.047

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.02.047

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.067

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.067

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2068

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2068

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.02.011

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.02.011

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.03.002

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2018-0430

https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2018-0430

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.072

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.072

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2009.07.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2009.07.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2014.05.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2014.05.002




systematic literature review. International Journal of Production
Research, 58(6), 1662–1687. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2019.1680896


Roser, C. (2016). “Faster, better, cheaper” in the history of manufacturing:
From the stone age to lean manufacturing and beyond. Boca Raton,
Florida, United States: Productivity Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/
9781315367941


Rüßmann, M., Lorenz, M., Gerbert, P., Waldner, M., Justus, J., Engel, P., &
Harnisch, M. (2015). Industry 4.0: The future of productivity and
growth in manufacturing industries. Boston Consulting Group, 9(1),
54–89.


Sanders, A., Elangeswaran, C., & Wulfsberg, J. P. (2016). Industry 4.0
implies lean manufacturing: Research activities in industry 4.0 function
as enablers for lean manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Engineering and
Management (JIEM), 9(3), 811–833. https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.
1940


Sarc, R., Curtis, A., Kandlbauer, L., Khodier, K., Lorber, K. E., &
Pomberger, R. (2019). Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in value
chain of circular economy oriented waste management—A review.
Waste Management, 95, 476–492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.
2019.06.035


Sargeant, J. M., Rajic, A., Read, S., & Ohlsson, A. (2006). The process of
systematic review and its application in agri-food public-health. Pre-
ventive Veterinary Medicine, 75(3–4), 141–151. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.prevetmed.2006.03.002


Schroeder, D. M., & Robinson, A. G. (2010). Green is free: Creating sustain-
able competitive advantage through green excellence. Organizational
Dynamics, 39(4), 345–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2010.
07.002


Schulz, C., Hjaltadóttir, R. E., & Hild, P. (2019). Practising circles: Studying
institutional change and circular economy practices. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 237, 117749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.
117749


Schünemann, H. J., Higgins, J. P. T., Vist, G. E., Glasziou, P., Akl, E. A.,
Skoetz, N., & Guyatt, G. H. (2020. Available from). Chapter 14: Com-
pleting “Summary of findings” tables and grading the certainty of the
evidence. In J. P. T. Higgins, J. Thomas, J. Chandler, M. Cumpston, T.
Li, M. J. Page, & V. A. Welch (Eds.), Cochrane handbook for systematic
reviews of interventions Version 6.1 (September 2020). Hoboken New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. Retrieved from www.training.cochrane.
org/handbook


Scuotto, V., Ferraris, A., & Bresciani, S. (2016). Internet of things:
Applications and challenges in smart cities: A case study of IBM
smart city projects. Business Process Management Journal, 22(2),
357–367.


Stahel, W. R. (2014). Reuse is the key to the circular economy. European
Commission Available: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-
eco-innovation/experts-interviews/reuse-is-the-key-to-the-circular-
economy_en.htm (accessed 15.07.20.)


Standing, C., Jackson, P., Sarkis, J., & Zhu, H. (2008). Information technol-
ogy and systems in China's circular economy. Journal of Systems and
Information Technology, 10(3), 202–217.


Stock, T., & Seliger, G. (2016). Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing
in Industry 4.0. Procedia Cirp, 40, 536–541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procir.2016.01.129


Strange, R., & Zucchella, A. (2017). Industry 4.0, global value chains and
international business. Multinational Business Review, 25(3), 174–184.


Su, B., Heshmati, A., Geng, Y., & Yu, X. (2013). A review of the circular
economy in China: Moving from rhetoric to implementation. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 42, 215–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2012.11.020


Supino, S., Malandrino, O., Testa, M., & Sica, D. (2016). Sustainability in
the EU cement industry: The Italian and German experiences. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 112, 430–442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2015.09.022


Szalavetz, A. (2019). Industry 4.0 and capability development in
manufacturing subsidiaries. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
145, 384–395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.06.027


Tao, F., Qi, Q., Liu, A., & Kusiak, A. (2018). Data-driven smart manufactur-
ing. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 48, 157–169. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.01.006


Tarifa-Fernández, J., Sánchez-Pérez, A. M., & Cruz-Rambaud, S. (2019).
Internet of things and their coming perspectives: A real options
approach. Sustainability (Switzerland), 11(11), 3178. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su11113178


Thomé, A. M. T., Scavarda, A., Ceryno, P. S., & Remmen, A. (2016). Sustain-
able new product development: A longitudinal review. Clean Technolo-
gies and Environmental Policy, 18(7), 2195–2208. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10098-016-1166-3


Tortorella, G. L., & Fettermann, D. (2018). Implementation of Industry 4.0
and lean production in Brazilian manufacturing companies. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, 56(8), 2975–2987. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1391420


Turner, C., Moreno, M., Mondini, L., Salonitis, K., Charnley, F., Tiwari, A., &
Hutabarat, W. (2019). Sustainable production in a circular economy: A
business model for re-distributed manufacturing. Sustainability, 1–19,
4291. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11164291


Tyl, B., Vallet, F., Bocken, N. M. P., & Real, M. (2015). The integration of a
stakeholder perspective into the front end of eco-innovation: A practi-
cal approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 108, 1–15. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.07.145


Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2007). Supply chain management and envi-
ronmental technologies: The role of integration. International Journal of
Production Research, 45(2), 401–423. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207540600597781


Valerio, P. (2017). How the internet of things enables the circular econ-
omy. Retrieved October 10, 2019, from https://theictscoop.com/
how-the-internet-of-things-enables-the-circular-economy-
fd98f43733ec


Van Fan, Y., Lee, C. T., Lim, J. S., Klemeš, J. J., & Le, P. T. K. (2019). Cross-
disciplinary approaches towards smart, resilient and sustainable circu-
lar economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 232, 1482–1491. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.266


Varela, L., Araújo, A., !Avila, P., Castro, H., & Putnik, G. (2019). Evaluation
of the relation between lean manufacturing, Industry 4.0, and sustain-
ability. Sustainability (Switzerland), 11(5), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su11051439


Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J., Dubey, R., &
Childe, S. J. (2017). Big data analytics and firm performance: Effects of
dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.009


Wang, S., Wan, J., Zhang, D., Li, D., & Zhang, C. (2016). Towards smart fac-
tory for industry 4.0: A self-organized multi-agent system with big
data based feedback and coordination. Computer Networks, 101,
158–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2015.12.017


Wen, Z., Hu, S., De Clercq, D., Beck, M. B., Zhang, H., Zhang, H., … Liu, J.
(2018). Design, implementation, and evaluation of an internet of things
(IoT) network system for restaurant food waste management. Waste
Management, 73, 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.
11.054


Wollschlaeger, M., Sauter, T., & Jasperneite, J. (2017). The future of indus-
trial communication: Automation networks in the era of the internet
of things and industry 4.0. IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, 11(1),
17–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2017.2649104


Yang, S., Raghavendra, M. R. A., Kaminski, J., & Pepin, H. (2018). Opportu-
nities for Industry 4.0 to support remanufacturing. Applied Sciences
(Switzerland), 8(7), 1177. https://doi.org/10.3390/app8071177


Yuan, Z., Bi, J., & Moriguichi, Y. (2006). The circular economy: A new
development strategy in China. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 10
(1–2), 4–8.


22 AWAN ET AL.



https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1680896

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1680896

https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315367941

https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315367941

https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.1940

https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.1940

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.035

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.035

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2006.03.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2006.03.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2010.07.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orgdyn.2010.07.002

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.117749

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.117749

http://www.training.cochrane.org/handbook

http://www.training.cochrane.org/handbook

http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-eco-innovation/experts-interviews/reuse-is-the-key-to-the-circular-economy_en.htm

http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-eco-innovation/experts-interviews/reuse-is-the-key-to-the-circular-economy_en.htm

http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/about-eco-innovation/experts-interviews/reuse-is-the-key-to-the-circular-economy_en.htm

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.129

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.129

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.06.027

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.01.006

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.01.006

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11113178

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11113178

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-016-1166-3

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-016-1166-3

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1391420

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1391420

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11164291

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.07.145

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.07.145

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540600597781

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540600597781

https://theictscoop.com/how-the-internet-of-things-enables-the-circular-economy-fd98f43733ec

https://theictscoop.com/how-the-internet-of-things-enables-the-circular-economy-fd98f43733ec

https://theictscoop.com/how-the-internet-of-things-enables-the-circular-economy-fd98f43733ec

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.266

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.266

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11051439

https://doi.org/10.3390/su11051439

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.009

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2015.12.017

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.054

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.054

https://doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2017.2649104

https://doi.org/10.3390/app8071177




Zhang, Y., Ren, S., Liu, Y., & Si, S. (2017). A big data analytics architecture
for cleaner manufacturing and maintenance processes of complex
products. Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 626–641. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.123


Zheng, P., Wang, Z., Chen, C., & Pheng, L. (2019). Advanced engineering
informatics review article a survey of smart product-service systems:
Key aspects, challenges and future perspectives. Advanced Engineering
Informatics, 42, 100973. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2019.100973


Zhong, R. Y., Xu, X., Klotz, E., & Newman, S. T. (2017). Intelligent
manufacturing in the context of Industry 4.0: A review. Engineering, 3
(5), 616–630. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.05.015


Zhu, Q., Geng, Y., & Lai, K. H. (2010). Circular economy practices
among Chinese manufacturers varying in environmental-oriented


supply chain cooperation and the performance implications. Journal of
Environmental Management, 91(6), 1324–1331. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jenvman.2010.02.013


How to cite this article: Awan U, Sroufe R, Shahbaz M.


Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: A literature review and


recommendations for future research. Bus Strat Env. 2021;


1–23. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2731


AWAN ET AL. 23



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.123

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.123

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2019.100973

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.05.015

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.02.013

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.02.013

https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2731


