









Research paper


Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future prospects on
logistics


Erik Hofmann*, Marco Rüsch
Chair of Logistics Management, University of St.Gallen, Dufourstrasse 40a, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland


A R T I C L E I N F O


Article history:
Received 15 June 2016
Received in revised form 19 February 2017
Accepted 13 April 2017
Available online 22 April 2017


Keywords:
Advanced manufacturing
Internet of things
Cyber-physical systems
Distributed ledger technology
Cross-company kanban
Just-in-time
Just-in-sequence


A B S T R A C T


Industry 4.0, referred to as the “Fourth Industrial Revolution”, also known as “smart manufacturing”,
“industrial internet” or “integrated industry”, is currently a much-discussed topic that supposedly has the
potential to affect entire industries by transforming the way goods are designed, manufactured, delivered
and payed. This paper seeks to discuss the opportunities of Industry 4.0 in the context of logistics
management, since implications are expected in this field. The authors pursue the goal of shedding light
on the young and mostly undiscovered topic of Industry 4.0 in the context of logistics management, thus
following a conceptual research approach. At first, a logistics-oriented Industry 4.0 application model as
well as the core components of Industry 4.0 are presented. Different logistics scenarios illustrate
potential implications in a practice-oriented manner and are discussed with industrial experts. The
studies reveal opportunities in terms of decentralisation, self-regulation and efficiency. Moreover, it
becomes apparent that the concept of Industry 4.0 still lacks a clear understanding and is not fully
established in practice yet. The investigations demonstrate potential Industry 4.0 implications in the
context of Just-in-Time/Just-in-Sequence and cross-company Kanban systems in a precise manner.
Practitioners could use the described scenarios as a reference to foster their own Industry 4.0 initiatives,
with respect to logistics management.


© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


1. Introduction


“The implementation starts with small steps here and there,
there won’t be a big bang that is going to introduce Industry 4.0.
On the contrary, it will come step by step. But if we look back in
ten years we will see that the world has changed significantly.”
([1]Hartmut Rauen, Deputy Executive Director Mechanical
Engineering Industry Association (VDMA), 2012).


In recent years, complexity and requirements in the
manufacturing industry have steadily increased. Factors such as
growing international competition, increasing market volatility,
demand for highly individualised products and shortened product
life cycles present serious challenges to companies [2]. It seems
that existing “approaches” of value creation are not suited to
handle the increasing requirements regarding cost efficiency,
flexibility, adaptability, stability and sustainability anymore. On
one hand, requirements in the manufacturing industry have
increased. On the other hand, the rapid technological progress in
the more recent past has opened up a range of new business


potentials and opportunities. Trends and new catchwords such as
digitalization, the internet of things (IoT), internet of services (IoS)
and cyber-physical systems (CPS) are becoming more and more
relevant. Against this backdrop, Germany, which is well known for
its strong manufacturing sector, launched the so-called “Industrie
4.0” initiative in 2011 as part of its high-tech strategy, introducing
the idea of a (fully) integrated industry [3,4]. Since then, Industry
4.0 has gained attention importance – also beyond the German-
speaking area – and has even been listed as a main topic on the
2016 World Economic Forum’s agenda.


Prophetically, Kagermann et al. [5] expect that strong industrial
nations such as Germany will only remain successful if they
manage to actively participate in the Industry 4.0 initiative. In
concrete terms, this means participating in the development,
merchandising and operation of autonomous, knowledge- and
sensor-based, self-regulating production systems. The opportu-
nities and benefits that are anticipated to come along with Industry
4.0 seem to be manifold, e.g. resulting in highly flexible mass
production, real-time coordination and optimisation of value
chains, reduction of complexity costs or the emergence of entirely
new services and business models.


As far as the field of logistics is concerned, major implications
are predicted, too. In fact, logistics represents an appropriate
application area for Industry 4.0 [3]. The integration of CPS and IoT


* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: erik.hofmann@unisg.ch (E. Hofmann).


http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002
0166-3615/© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers in Industry


journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/ locate /compind







http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002&domain=pdf

undefined

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2017.04.002

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615

www.elsevier.com/locate/compind




into logistics promises to enable a real-time tracking of material
flows, improved transport handling as well as an accurate risk
management, to mention but a few prospects. In fact, one could
argue that Industry 4.0 in its pure vision can only become reality if
logistics is capable of providing production systems with the
needed input factors at the right time, in the right quality and in the
right place.


As promising as the idea of a self-prophesying “Fourth
Industrial Revolution” may sound at first sight, it is essential to
remark that there is a multitude of challenges, risks and barriers
with regard to its implementation. Traditional industry boundaries
will vanish due to the reorganisation of value creation processes
and cause severe changes within and across organisations.
Defining appropriate infrastructures and standards, ensuring data
security and educating employees are among the issues that need
to be addressed on the road to Industry 4.0.


Unsurprisingly, a huge number of practitioner-oriented articles
and papers address the opportunities of Industry 4.0 and seek to
motivate (or even urge) companies to participate in the initiative.
Although the term Industry 4.0 roots back to Germany’s high-tech
strategy and thus has received a lot of attention recently, it still
lacks a precise, generally accepted definition. This situation must
be considered unsatisfying, especially from a scientific point of
view.


The present paper picks up on this deficit and aims to sharpen
critically the picture of Industry 4.0 with regard to logistics
management, since major consequences are expected in this field.
Based on a theoretical and conceptual ground work, the authors
select some prominent logistics concepts so as to describe
potential implications and pitfalls of Industry 4.0 in detail. After
that, the findings are reflected and discussed with experts in terms
of practical feasibility.


Against this backdrop, our ambitions are reflected by the
following research question:


What are the implications of Industry 4.0 for future logistics
management? In particular: How may Industry 4.0 affect
logistics concepts, namely Kanban and Just-in-Time/Just-in-
Sequence?


Current research still lacks consistent knowledge about how the
“Fourth Industrial Revolution” is going to affect future industries.
Against this background, we follow a conceptual research
approach as described by Meredith [6], serving an exploratory
purpose so as to provide a better understanding of this rather
undiscovered topic. The research process can be divided into the
following phases: The initial phase was devoted to narrowing
down the topic and its scope. This was accomplished first through
multiple unstructured discussions within the affiliated research
team of the authors as well as through desk research. Following
that, the authors conducted a literature review on the topic of
Industry 4.0 in the second phase. The reason for examining past
and current literature was twofold: On one hand, the review was
conducted in order to investigate the background and origin of
Industry 4.0. On the other hand – with respect to the fact that
Industry 4.0 has become a buzzword recently but still lacks a
generally accepted conceptual understanding – it served the
purpose of identifying its key components and characteristics so as
to sharpen the picture. In the third and main phase of this paper,
we try to investigate potential implications and pitfalls of Industry
4.0 in the field of logistics management and thereupon construct
and describe a number of scenarios with regard to specific logistics
concepts. The findings are summarized in propositions. Moreover,
eight experts in the field of logistics and supply chain management
are interviewed in order to evaluate the propositions. The final
phase comprises a (self-)critical review of the research process and
findings by the authors.


With regard to the structure of this paper, four main parts can
be distinguished: The first section of the paper is devoted to
introducing and emphasizing the topicality of Industry 4.0.
Moreover, the aim, research question, structure and methodology
are covered. Following that, a comprehensive literature review on
the subject of Industry 4.0 is conducted in the second part so as to
lay a solid theoretical foundation for the subsequent research. In
Section 3, two well known logistics concepts are analysed with
respect to potential Industry 4.0 consequences. Experts from
different industries are then questioned in order to evaluate the
findings in terms of practical relevance. The last part of the paper
comprises a critical review of the core findings and thereupon
offers suggestions for future research.


2. Literature review


2.1. Industry 4.0 emergence


The industrial sector plays a crucial role in Europe, serving as a
key driver of economic growth (e.g. job creation) and accounting
for 75% of all exports and 80% of all innovations [7]. However, the
European manufacturing landscape is twofold. While Eastern
Europe and Germany show a constantly growing industrial sector,
many Western European countries such as Great Britain or France
have experienced shrinking market shares in the last two decades.
While Europe has lost about 10% of its industrial share over the past
20 years, emerging countries managed to double their share,
accounting for 40% of global manufacturing. A few years ago,
Germany started thinking about initiatives in order to maintain
and even foster its role as a “forerunner” in the industrial sector.
Eventually, the term Industry 4.0 was publicly introduced at the
Hanover Trade Fair in 2011, presented as part of Germany’s high-
tech strategy so as to prepare and strengthen the industrial sector
with regard to future production requirements [8]. While the IoT is
assumed to take on a leading role in the Industry 4.0 era, Hermann
et al. [9] found that the IoS will find its way into factories, too. CPS,
which are able to interact with their environment via sensors and
actuators, constitute another element of Industry 4.0, since they
are expected to enable factories to organise and control themselves
autonomous in a decentralised fashion and in real time [4]. Due to
their capabilities, these factories are often referred to as “smart
factories”. Given all these concepts, the difficulty of finding a
unique and concise definition for Industry 4.0 becomes apparent,
and it is hardly surprising that opinions among researchers and
practitioners diverge. Moreover, it is still uncertain how Industry
4.0 will manifest itself in practice and how much time that will
take. With respect to a more precise understanding of the topic, we
now try to clarify the core components of Industry 4.0.


2.2. Industry 4.0 key components


Hermann et al. [9] identified four Industry 4.0 key components
based on a review of academic and business publications, using
different publication databases so as to ensure objectivity. These
key components are now briefly described.


Cyber-physical systems (CPS): Industry 4.0 is characterised by
an unprecedented connection via the internet or other distributed
ledgers and so-called CPS, which can be considered systems that
bring the physical and the virtual world together [10]. More
precisely, “cyber-physical systems are integrations of computation
with physical processes. Embedded computers and networks
monitor and control the physical processes, usually with feedback
loops where physical processes affect computations and vice
versa” ([11]; p. 1). In the manufacturing context, this means that
information related to the physical shop floor and the virtual
computational space are highly synchronised [12]. This allows for a


24 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34














whole new degree of control, surveillance, transparency and
efficiency in the production process. With regard to their structure,
CPS have “two parallel networks to control, namely a physical
network of interconnected components of the infrastructure and a
cyber network comprised of intelligent controllers and the
communication links among them” ([13], p. 928). CPS realise
the integration of these networks through the use of multiple
sensors, actuators, control processing units and communication
devices.


Internet of things (IoT): The term “internet of things” became
popular in the first decade of the 21st century and can be
considered an initiator of Industry 4.0 [14]. “Smart, connected
products offer exponentially expanding opportunities for new
functionality, far greater reliability, much higher product utiliza-
tion, and capabilities that cut across and transcend traditional
product boundaries” [15]Porter and Heppelmann, 2014; p. 4). Also
Nolin and Olson [16] note that the IoT “seems to envisage a society
where all members have access to a full-fledged Internet
environment populated by self-configuring, self-managing, smart
technology anytime and anywhere” (p. 361). The IoT is expected to
open up numerous economic opportunities and can be considered
one of the most promising technologies with a huge disruptive
potential. For the purpose of clarification, Fleisch [17] stresses the
need to distinguish the IoT concept from the “ordinary” internet,
arguing that “the nerve ends in the IoT are very small, in many cases
even invisible, low-end and low energy consumption computers
[ . . . ] whereas the nerve ends of the Internet are full-blown
computers” (p. 3). Moreover, the number of network nodes in the
IoT is significantly higher than in the conventional internet
(“trillions versus billions”). Eventually, literature provides a wide
range of definitions for the IoT. Some of them are very specific,
other ones feature a more general character. For pragmatic reasons,
this paper sticks to a rather comprehensive definition by referring
to the IoT as a world where basically all (physical) things can turn
into so-called “smart things” by featuring small computers that are
connected to the internet [17].


Internet of services (Io):SIt is often said that we are living in a
so-called “service society” these days [18]. With respect to that,
there are strong indications that, similar to the IoT, an internet of
services (IoS) is emerging, based on the idea that services are made
easily available through web technologies, allowing companies
and private users to combine, create and offer new kind of value-
added services [19]. It can be assumed that internet-based market
places of services will play a key role in future industries. Whereas
from a pure technological perspective, concepts such as service-
oriented architecture (SOA), software as a service (SaaS) or
business process outsourcing (BPO) are closely related to the
IoS, Barros and Oberle [20] propose a broader definition of the term
service, namely “a commercial transaction where one party grants
temporary access to the resources of another party in order to
perform a prescribed function and a related benefit. Resources may
be human workforce and skills, technical systems, information,
consumables, land and others” (p. 6).For the purpose of this paper,
we will follow the latter definition.


Smart factory: Up to now, CPS, the IoT and IoS were introduced
as core components of Industry 4.0. It must be noted that these
“concepts” are closely linked to each other, since CPS communicate
over the IoT and IoS, therefore enabling the so-called “smart
factory”, which is built on the idea of a decentralised production
system, in which “human beings, machines and resources
communicate with each other as naturally as in a social network”
([14]; p. 19). The close linkage and communication between
products, machinery, transport systems and humans is expected to
change the existing production logic. Therefore, smart factories can
be considered another key feature of Industry 4.0. In the smart
factory, products find their way independently through production


processes and are easily identifiable and locatable at any time,
pursuing the idea of a cost-efficient, yet highly flexible and
individualised mass production. [14] note that smart factories “will
make the increasing complexity of manufacturing processes
manageable for the people who work there and will ensure that
production can be simultaneously attractive, sustainable in an
urban environment and profitable” (p. 21). Hence, the potentials
that might come along with smart factories are expected to be
huge. It is important to understand that not only production
processes but also the roles of employees are expected to change
dramatically. Spath et al. [2] expect employees to enjoy greater
responsibility, to act as decision makers and to take on supervising
tasks instead of driving forklifts, for instance. In the same context,
some critics have recently pointed out that the automated and self-
regulating nature of the smart factory might cause severe job
destruction. However, hardly any reliable study supports that fear.


Beyond these key components, there is an increasing set of
further Industry4.0-technologies in a broader sense, such as
wearables (e.g. smart watches, glasses or gloves), augmented
reality applications, autonomous vehicles (incl. drones), distribut-
ed ledger systems (e.g. the blockchain1) or even big data analytics.


As a first preliminary summary, we define Industry 4.0 as
follows:


! Products and services are flexibly connected via the internet or
other network applications like the blockchain (consistent
connectivity and computerization).


! The digital connectivity enables an automated and self-
optimised production of goods and services including the
delivering without human interventions (self-adapting produc-
tion systems based on transparency and predictive power).


! The value networks are controlled decentralised while system
elements (like manufacturing facilities or transport vehicles) are
making autonomous decisions (autonomous and decentralised
decision making).


With respect to logistics management, Industry 4.0 is expected
to achieve opportunities in terms of decentralisation, self-
regulation and efficiency.


3. Industry 4.0: implications for logistics management


3.1. Approach


We now aim to answer the question whether logistics
management might be affected by Industry 4.0. Thereby, we
follow the conceptual research approach suggested by Meredith
[6]. Our argumentation is based on a simple logistics-oriented
Industry 4.0 application model as described in Fig. 1. The model
encompasses two dimensions:


(1) Physical supply chain dimension: Autonomous and self-con-
trolled logistics sub systems like transport (e.g. via autono-
mous trucks), turnover handlings (e.g. via trailer unloading or
piece picking robots) or order processing (e.g. via smart
contracts on the blockchain technology) are interacting among
each other.


(2) Digital data value chain dimension: Machine and sensor data are
collected at level of the “physical thing” along the entire


1 The blockchain is a distributed, public ledger which is collectively kept up to
date according to strict rules and general agreement. The technology behind solves
a well-known computer science problem called "The General Byzantine Problem”
described by [34]. The blockchain enables to reach a consensus in a system with
potentially malicious actors and without a central authority ([35]; p. 82).


E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34 25










physical end-to-end supply chain. Via a connectivity layer the
gathered data is provided for any kind of analytics (e.g. in the
cloud), possibly resulting in potential value-added business
services.


Out of this two-dimensioned application model, three customer
value components are expected. First, the “value of availability”,
meaning making products and services available to the customer
via autonomous delivering. Value creation through availability of
goods or services is the main added value of logistics activities and
services. Second, “value of digital integration” arises through a
permeable transparency and traceability along the supply chain.
Furthermore, order processing systems are interconnected,
facilitating seamless business executions (e.g. object self-service,
remote usages or condition monitoring). Third, consumption
normally exceeds the classical point-of-sale (POS), but this does
not mean that the supply chain ends at this point. There exist
several IT-based service options going beyond the simple
distribution of products or physical services (=“value of digital
servitization”). Aside digitally charged things where physical
products are “charged” with additional digital services, the data
itself creates value outside the original use case (“sensor as a
service”).


The units of analysis are common and well established logistics
concepts. It is assumed that these concepts will pass through a
digital transformation, too. Thus, the following needs to be kept in
mind: First of all, it is not possible to consider all ideas, concepts
and elements of Industry 4.0. Consequently, the scenarios only
comprise a selection of those. Moreover, the described effects do
no feature an exclusive character, meaning that if it is suggested
that Industry 4.0 may affect concept x (e.g. cross-company Kanban)
in a particular way, it might also affect concept y (e.g. JIT/JIT) in a


similar way. Given these constraints, the authors do not seek to
provide generally valid statements about how Industry 4.0 will
affect logistics management, but rather aims to illustrate and
discuss “some” potential use cases. Based on a comprehensive
literature review, the main process steps and activities (phases) of
the selected logistics concepts were elaborated. For each of these
phases, potential implications of Industry 4.0 were identified. Here,
in each case the central characteristics and components of Industry
4.0 are mentioned. Furthermore, real world examples and
approaches were identified for illustrative reasons if possible.
The central findings were further summarized in propositions.
Finally, the results were subsequently reflected again with the
experts. If it has been appropriate and necessary, adjustments were
made in formulating. A critical discussion completes the explor-
ative research.


3.2. Selection of logistics concepts for the industry4.0 analysis


Our selection is based on three aspects. First, the concepts
should comprise a cross-organisational component and therefore
be closely related to logistics and supply chain management.
Recently, articles and papers often focus on specific “intra-
logistics” areas – e.g. production logistics (e.g. [21,22] or [23] –
and hereby ignore cross-organisational aspects. Second, the
concepts have to be considered relevant to the practical world
in terms of acceptance and distribution. The authors used the
publication database EBSCOhost as well as the scholarly literature
search engine Google Scholar so as to underline the importance of
these concepts. The databases were searched with respect to
publications with a clear reference to the concepts in either their
title or abstract. Given the search string results displayed in Table 2,
four concepts – namely cross-company-oriented Kanban, JIT/JIS,


Fig. 1. A logistics-oriented Industry 4.0 application model.
(Source: According to [39; p. 7])


Table 1
Search String Results.


Logistic concepts
(Search Term(s))


Number of Publications in which Search Term(s) occurred in Title or Abstract


EBSCOhost
(academic journals only)


Google Scholar
(Title only)


Just-in-Time (JIT)/Just-in-Sequence (JIS) 1636 7109
Kanban (cross-company-oriented approach) 1029 2200
Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI) 539 799
Cross-docking 165 565


26 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34






VMI and Cross-docking – are localized. Third, the concepts should
be susceptive for fully automated implementations. In such a case
the machines will directly communicate and transfer materials
with each other without involving any visible intervention or
human work. The concepts cross-company-oriented Kanban and
JIT/JIS are two important operational-level techniques which may
be affected by new technologies, such as IoT or autonomous
transport. They seem to be more appropriate to be discussed in the
context of Industry 4.0 as compared to those tactical-level
approaches such as VMI and Cross-docking (Table 1).


3.3. Just-in-Time (JIT) and Just-in-Sequence (JIS)


3.3.1. Backdrop
Just-in-Time (JIT) is a prominent and widely accepted concept


in production and logistics, especially in the automotive industry.
Similar to the previously discussed Kanban concept, JIT follows a
lean approach and is strictly pull oriented, meaning that material is
only produced and supplied in case of an actual demand. JIT
primarily focuses on the supplier-buyer relationship and can
therefore be considered a cross-company approach. Its main
objective is to realise a zero- or low-stock supply system.
Moreover, JIT seeks for a demand-tailored realisation of goods
exchange processes within and across companies as well as short
delivery respectively cycle times. Finally, JIT aims to increase
overall supply chain flexibility and agility [29]. However, the
implementation of JIT systems is far from trivial. First of all,
production planning needs to be precisely aligned to actual
demand. Furthermore, a high level of integration with regard to
material and information flows needs to be established, since there
is only little or no inventory kept as a buffer, e.g. in case material is
directly shipped from the supplier’s production facility to the
buyer’s production facility without temporary storage. Against this
backdrop, a close coordination between suppliers and buyers is a
prerequisite for success [30]. Finally, it has to be mentioned that a
JIT strategy is primarily suited in case of high-value products that
are consumed on a constant, well-predictable basis.


Whereas – in short – JIT calls for the right material to be
supplied at the right time and in the right place, the so-called Just-
in-Sequence (JIS) concept goes one step further by ensuring that
the material also arrives in the right sequence with respect to its
further processing. Hence, incoming material does not have to be
sorted by the buyer anymore. JIS can therefore be considered an
enhancement of JIT, which means that, apart from additional
benefits (no sorting etc.), requirements are even higher, especially
with regard to transport planning.


3.3.2. Potential implications of industry 4.0
JIT/JIS systems generally pass the following process steps and


activities: (i) production planning, (ii) production order, (iii)
disposition and production, as well as (iv) delivery. Table 2
illustrates how JIT/JIS systems may be impacted by Industry 4.0.
Since JIT/JIS particularly rely on planning accuracy, information
transparency and well-coordinated transport processes, a special
focus is put on these areas.


Fig. 2 again illustrates the typical process steps and activities of
JIT/JIS systems, highlighting the main implications of Industry4.0.


As production planning is crucial in JIT/JIS systems, the
increasing use of Auto-ID technologies has the potential to
facilitate production planning or even make it futile (step 1).
With respect to the coordination between supply chain actors,
cloud or distributed ledger technology might enable the creation of
a virtual ERP system for the whole supply chain, so that all actors
can share and act upon the same information. Bullwhip effects may
therefore be avoided or reduced (steps 2 & 3). Moreover, transport
processes, which are also highly important in JIT/JIS so as to ensure
delivery at the right time, might be coordinated in an end-to-end
fashion across the whole supply chain (step 4). In conclusion,
Industry 4.0 provides the opportunity to improve JIT/JIS systems,
since it may enable actors to exchange and act upon real-time
information in a coordinated end-to-end fashion.


3.3.3. Derivation of JIT/JIS-related propositions
Now, the key implications of Industry 4.0 with regard to JIT/JIS


are discussed with two supply chain management experts and
propositions (PP) were derived.
Interviewed Experts Industry 4.0 Related Knowledge &


Experience


Expert 3: Supply Chain Specialist at a
Medical Device Company


Moderate knowledge, based on
literature


Expert 4: Project Leader Supply Chain
and Logistics at a Commercial
Vehicle Technology Company


Moderate knowledge, mainly based on
literature and discussions with
colleagues


PP1JIT/JIS: Industry 4.0 will enable an increasingly automated,
decentralised and more accurate demand planning and forecasting
in JIT/JIS systems, since material consumption and material flows –
e.g. inbound and outbound flows – can be tracked precisely and
close to real time through the use of CPS and Auto-ID systems.


The experts partially agree with the proposition. Expert 3
mentions that one has to differentiate between long-term and
short-term demand planning. As far as the latter is concerned, he in
fact believes that a real-time tracking of material flows and
consumption can improve demand planning. However, with
respect to long-term demand planning – especially in case of
products with long replenishment times – Expert 3 does not expect
real-time information to have a significant potential, arguing that it
does not matter whether one gets a particular information on day x
or on day x + 1, since replenishment will take a long time anyway.
Expert 4 agrees with this argument and adds that in the
automotive industry (where JIT/JIS is primarily applied) informa-
tion transparency is already on a high level, meaning that there is
no substantial need for real-time data.


PP2JIT/JIS: Industry 4.0 will enable a high degree of process
integration along the supply chain. Virtual, e.g. cloud-based ERP or
distributed ledger systems for the whole supply chain will increase
end-to-end transparency and automated execution of JIT/JIS
systems. Against this backdrop, processes will not be planned
and executed individually by single actors anymore, but in an
integrated fashion across the supply chain.


Expert 3 agrees with the statement, arguing that a uniform
system, which integrates all supply chain actors, offers potential
with regard to overall coordination. He further notes that cloud
computing might indeed be a promising approach, since cloud


Table 2
Characteristics of Industry 4.0 Scenario for Just-in-Time/Just-in-Sequence.


Just-in-Time/Just-in-Sequence: Process
Steps and Activities


Industry 4.0 Scenario Industry 4.0
Characteristics & Components


Selected Real-World Examples and
Approaches


1. Production planning
Precise planning of production based


Through the increasing traceability of
material and products that are equipped
with Auto-ID technology, production


Real-time tracking of material flows
Supply chain integration


Smart Sales and Distribution, Smart
Shopfloor & Planning by Fistec enables
companies to track material flows (in-


E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34 27






Table 2 (Continued)


Just-in-Time/Just-in-Sequence: Process
Steps and Activities


Industry 4.0 Scenario Industry 4.0
Characteristics & Components


Selected Real-World Examples and
Approaches


on (future) demand patterns
respectively forecasts.


planning may be far more accurate in
Industry 4.0, since material flows – e.g.
inbound and outbound flows at a selling
point – can be tracked in real time and
therefore allow for a precise deduction
of demand patterns. Moreover,
deterministic production planning
might shrink to a minimum or even
become futile, if material flows can be
tracked precisely. If a product is
consumed or sold at a particular point in
the supply chain, all relevant players
(suppliers) get an immediate
notification and adjust their production
according to the current demand. In this
case, so-called bullwhip-effects might
be avoided or mitigated, since all players
would be able to act on the same (real-
time) information.


and outbound) closely via mobile
devices and allows for a more effective
and comfortable use of ERP systems [25;
p. 70].


2. Production order
Based on the production planning, the
buyer sends an order to the supplier
(s), requesting the exact amount of
material that is required.


Industry 4.0 promises highly integrated
material and information flows across
the whole supply chain. This may result
in more efficient JIT/JIS-systems, since
e.g. real-time consumption of products
may automatically trigger supply orders
or inform suppliers about the
consumption. Hence, production orders
are aligned with actual consumption,
meaning that as soon as a particular
product is consumed or required, a re-
supply order is released. Full
transparency across the supply chain
could be realised through e.g. a cloud-
based ERP system or a distributed ledger
system (blockchain technology) that
integrates the whole supply chain
respectively its actors. If demand arises
at a particular point in the supply chain,
all relevant suppliers might get an
immediate order to produce the needed
components.


! Digital reflection of supply chain
activities and processes


! Integrated material and information
flows


! Supply chain integration through
cloud or blockchain technology


Ultriva’s Collaborative Supply Portal
enables full visibility into demand and
supply and improves collaboration
between supply chain partners through
the use of a single platform for demand
signals, order management and goods
shipment [27].


3. Disposition & production
Consumption (by the buyer) is
transmitted in real time and triggers
the supplier’s production.


Suppliers get real time information and
updates consumption at a buyer’s site
and are therefore able to improve their
production planning, since consumption
data is transmitted immediately and
continuously (not discretely). As a result,
suppliers gain additional flexibility (time
advantage) and JIT/JIS cycle times might
be reduced.


! Decentralised decision-making/self-
regulation


! CPS
! Connected plants and production


facilities


N.A.


4. Delivery
The supplier commits to deliver the
right material at the right time, in the
right place and – in case of JIS – in the
right sequence with regard to the
further processing of the material.


Intelligent routing systems promise
huge potential with regard to a just-in-
time delivery. Telematics units for
instance may be used to track the
freight’s location or state-related data
such as air pressure, temperature etc.
during transportation and advise the
carrier (e.g. the truck driver) with
information regarding traffic or weather,
enabling her/him to adjust the route. In
case of fully transparent and integrated
supply chains, delivery respectively
transport processes might be optimised
across the entire supply chain.
Simulation tools might help to calculate
adequate transportation given the
specific order requirements (e.g. timing).
Transport processes may therefore not
be planned individually anymore, but in
an integrated end-to-end fashion. In the
long run, the collection and delivery
could fulfilled by autonomous and self-
driving trucks.


Condition monitoring
Simulation of processes
Supply chain integration
Integrated mobile information systems


MAN-telematics and Volkswagen’s Car-
to-X inform drivers about traffic
conditions and allow traffic participants
to communicate with each other
through the use of position-based
routing technologies and algorythms
[26,28]


Sources: Banyai [24], Kutschenreiter [25], MAN [26], Ultriva [27], Volkswagen [28]


28 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34






solutions are simple to use respectively provide an easy interface to
its users. In contrast, Expert 4 believes that the idea of an
integrative end-to-end perspective on supply chains does not
make much sense. He argues that today’s supply chains are far too
complex and involve too many actors so as to manage all of them in
an integrated manner on one single system. Against this backdrop,
he suggests to put the focus on crucial parts or fragments of the
supply chain and not on the supply chain as a whole.


3.4. Cross-company Kanban


3.4.1. Backdrop
The Kanban concept originated in Japan and, generally


speaking, can be considered a scheduling system in manufacturing.
Its core characteristic is a rigid pull-orientation of the production
processes, which is why terms such as pull concept or pull system
are often used synonymously. Henderson [31] describes Kanban as
follows: “Kanban is basically the system of supplying parts and
materials just at the very moment they are needed in the factory
production process so that those parts and materials are instantly
put to use” (p. 6). To do so, the station which has run out of material
uses so-called Kanbans (Japanese word for billboard/signboard) so
as to signal the precise quantity of material that needs to be
supplied. The essential idea behind this concept is that the number
of Kanbans respectively bins or containers determines the
maximum inventory level within a “loop” between a supplying
and a receiving station. The supplying station therefore only starts
producing when the receiving station indicates an actual demand
signal. Kanban, which is based on the idea of self-regulating loop
systems, allows for a systematic reduction of inventory level and
costs. In addition, a strictly demand-oriented production of rather
small lot sizes alleviates so-called bullwhip effects, one of the
major challenges in supply chain and logistics management. Yet,
Kanban systems are suitable only if fluctuations in demand are
rather small, both within the actual production system and with
regard to the (end) customer. Furthermore, workforce capacity
must be coordinated with respect to actual production needs.
Therefore, flexible working time models might be required. Finally,
especially cross-company Kanban systems only run successfully if
high standards with regard to information flows and product
quality can be ensured. Inaccuracies and mistakes pose a high risk
and should therefore be avoided or at least be reduced to a
minimum (“zero-defect policy”), since there is no or only little
inventory kept in Kanban systems.


3.4.2. Potential implications of industry 4.0
Kanban systems across company boarders include the following


process steps and activities: (i) demand assessment, (ii) Kanban
signal, (iii) disposition and production, (iv) collection and delivery,
as well as (v) goods receipt. Table 3 illustrates potential
opportunities and consequences of Industry 4.0 for Kanban along
the process steps.


Fig. 3 depicts the previously discussed implications and
illustrates what a Kanban cycle might look like in the context of
Industry 4.0. Following that, the main results are summarized
concisely.


In traditional Kanban systems, demand respectively replenish-
ment quantity is usually assessed through the “state” of bins,
meaning that empty bins trigger a replenishment process. Due to
the use of technologies such as RFID and sensor systems, demand
assessment might follow a real-time approach in the future with
only little or no need for human participation (step 1). In addition,
material requirements may be digitally forwarded, whereas
demand is signalled through (physical) Kanban cards or bins in
conventional systems (step 2). Due to this precise and real-time
oriented information flow enabled by the use of CPS (e.g.
“intelligent bins”), suppliers may gain additional flexibility with
regard to their replenishment activities (step 3). Furthermore,
milkruns might follow a strictly demand-driven logic and therefore
become highly dynamic, resulting in more efficient collection and
delivery processes (step 4). Besides that, Auto-ID technology
facilitates goods receipt processes (step 5).


3.4.3. Derivation of Kanban-related propositions
Based on the findings, we derived a number of propositions


(PP), comprising the key implications of Industry 4.0 on the
concept of Kanban. In order to discuss and evaluate the relevance
and feasibility of these propositions, again expert interviews were
conducted.
Interviewed Experts Industry 4.0 Related Knowledge &


Experience


Expert 1: Supply Chain Strategy
Expert at an Engineering and
Electronics Company


Profound knowledge, mainly based on
literature, symposia and expert
discussions


Expert 2: Innovation Manager at a
Logistics Solution Provider


Mainly theoretical and conceptual
knowledge


Fig. 2. Modified Just-in-Time/Just-in-Sequence cycle according the Industry 4.0 Scenario.


E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34 29






Table 3
Characteristics of Industry 4.0 Scenario for cross-company Kanban.


Kanban: Process Steps & Activities Industry 4.0 Scenario Industry 4.0
Characteristics &
Components


Real-World
Examples/
Approaches


1. Demand assessment
Demand is assessed at a particular workstation,
based on the available respectively remaining
input components and workpieces, which are
usually stored in Kanban containers or bins.


In an Industry 4.0 scenario, the use of Auto-ID
technology – e.g. RFID tags and scanning
devices – may enable an accelerated, more
precise demand assessment process, since less
manual interaction is required (e.g. for
counting the remaining material). Human
interaction may even become futile in this
process if inventory levels are measured
automatically by autonomous systems, e.g.
RFID-reading shelves. Kanban bins might even
be equipped with sensor systems that are
capable of tracking fill levels and other
characteristics – such as temperature or air
pressure in case of sensitive material " in real
time. Based on this information, bins might
perform actions autonomously, e.g. release a
replenishment order or initiate a depletion of
bins (executed by actuators). In this scenario,
bins can be considered complex CPS.


CPS
Human-Machine
interaction
Real-time data
capturing and
exchange
Traceability and
transparency
(Auto-ID)


Würth Industry Service’s iBin“ delivers
accurate fill level and order information
through the use of an integrated camera and
releases supply orders automatically through
RFID-technology. The ‘Bayerischer
Forschungsverbund’ has developed a thermal
container FORFood that senses and transmits
information on air temperature, moisture,
vibrations etc. ([3]; p. 306–307).


2. Kanban signal
Demand signals are transmitted (physically) via
“encoded” bins or Kanban cards, which contain
specific information regarding the required
material (e.g. needed quantity).


In the era of Industry 4.0, demand will be
signalled digitally. Electronic Kanban systems
(e-Kanbans) have been in use for several years,
meaning that sensors recognise the fill level of
bins. This information may be directly fed into
the material planning system, which then
sends a supply order respectively signal to the
supplier in case the bins are empty. Kanban
signals might even be transmitted in real time,
meaning that the cyber-physical bins (as
described above) transmit their fill levels
directly to the supplier. Therefore, the supplier
gets updated on material consumption in real
time. In this scenario, Kanban signals are not
released on a cyclical or event-driven basis
anymore (e.g. when an employee realises that
bins are empty).


Vertical
integration (from
field level to
enterprise level)
CPS
Real-time data
exchange


N.A.


3. Disposition & production
The supplier receives demand signals via Kanban
cards or bins (predefined lot-size!) and thereupon
triggers production.


Since consumption data is transmitted closer
to real time and in a continuous fashion (not
event driven or cyclically), suppliers get a time
advantage with regard to their production
(planning). This may increase suppliers’
flexibility and ability to react, e.g. in case of
sudden fluctuations in demand (which often
present a challenge to conventional Kanban
systems). If production facilities of buyers and
suppliers are able to communicate directly
with each other, cyber-physical bins might
initiate production at the buyer’s site without
any human interaction. Consumption (by the
buyer) and production (by the supplier) might
therefore be closely aligned and allow for a
reduction of cycle times.


Decentralised
decision-
making/self-
regulation
CPS
Connected
plants/
production
facilities


L-Mobile’s RFID Kanban enables full visibility
of all processes within a Kanban system
through the use of RFID technology (orders,
bins, material, workpieces, machines) and
initiates supply automatically [33].


4. Collection & delivery
Collection and delivery often follows a so-called
milk run approach, meaning that the material is
collected and delivered in round trips, which are
commonly initiated on an interval basis (e.g. once
a day) with a fixed route.


Industry 4.0 may enable a more efficient
delivery of material. Due to the increasing
digitization of material flows, delivery
processes may be simulated with respect to
adjacent processes, e.g. taking remaining
production time into consideration. This is
especially helpful in case of a wide range of
products with different production cycles. The
result would be a highly dynamic milkrun that
is not time-driven (and therefore often not
used to full capacity) but demand-driven.
With respect to internal material flows, so-
called modular material flow systems might
come into play, enabling a highly flexible and
autonomous transport of material. Telematics
units may furthermore facilitate cross-
organisational delivery respectively transport
processes by e.g. assisting truck drivers with
information regarding traffic etc., allowing
them to optimise their route. In the long run,
the collection and delivery could be fulfilled
by autonomous and self-driving trucks.


(Virtual)
Simulation of
processes
Digital reflection
of factory
Autonomous
processes
Integrated
mobile
information
systems


The Bremer Institut für Produktion und
Logistik [32] has developed a dynamic
milkrun that follows a strictly demand
approach and helps reduce wastage.
Moreover, its celluveyor conveyor system
transports material through the factory
autonomously.


30 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34






PP1Kanban: Collection and transmission of information within
cross-company Kanban systems will be of an increasingly
decentralised, automated and autonomous nature in an Industry
4.0 environment, with little or no human interaction through the
integration of CPS and the use of Auto-ID technologies such as
RFID. Especially labour-intensive activities (e.g. stocktaking) will
be supported by these technologies (e.g. robotics) and will run fully
autonomously in the foreseeable future.


Both experts agree with the proposition. Expert 1 observes an
increasing digitalization and automation in today’s value chains
and in logistics. With regard to Kanban, he notes that systems such
as the intelligent bin (iBin) represent typical Industry 4.0
applications, running autonomously and following a decentralised
control logic. Expert 2 adds that the organisation he works for
strongly engages in the development of such systems and
technologies. However, both experts are unsure whether the
vision of fully autonomous processes is feasible. Expert 2 notes that
there exist a variety of serious challenges that need to be overcome
first. Hence, he predicts that robots, CPS etc. will rather coexist
with than replace logistics personnel on the shop floor.


PP2Kanban: Since CPS and the IoT enable a real-time or close to
real-time exchange of information between buyers and suppliers,
flexibility and ability to react – e.g. in case of sudden fluctuations in
demand – will increase in Kanban systems.


Expert 1 agrees with the proposition, arguing that market
volatility will continue to increase in the future and that demand
patterns will become more and more difficult to predict, which
means that companies need to improve their flexibility in order to
fulfil demand. According to him, the Industry 4.0 initiative
particularly aims to provide solutions to enable companies to
meet these requirements. Expert 2 is in support of this
argumentation, noting that the ubiquitous availability of data
gained and provided by CPS will increase flexibility within Kanban
cycles. Yet, Expert 2 also mentions that data security might be a
critical issue, arguing that many companies may have concerns
with regard to potentially confidential data that could be revealed
to other companies.


PP3Kanban: Due to the high degree of integration and informa-
tion sharing between suppliers and buyers, Kanban systems will
follow a strictly demand-oriented approach in the future, resulting
in dynamic, more efficient milkruns and shortened cycle times.


Both experts are in complete agreement with P3. However,
Expert 2 notes that – from a practitioner’s point of view – it
remains unclear whether the potential benefits from Industry 4.0
will compensate for the (substantial) investments that are required
so as to make companies “ready” for Industry. Nevertheless, both
experts predict that Industry 4.0 will increase the efficiency of
Kanban cycles.


Table 3 (Continued)


Kanban: Process Steps & Activities Industry 4.0 Scenario Industry 4.0
Characteristics &
Components


Real-World
Examples/
Approaches


5. Goods receipt
The buyer receives and controls the material.


Auto-ID technologies may facilitate and
accelerate goods receipt processes. Employees
may use a scanning device so as to identify and
control incoming material respectively bins,
which are equipped with Auto-ID tags.
Whereas the use of scanning devices still
requires human interaction, one might also
install gate control systems that automatically
identify incoming material and control it with
regard to the respective order. In case of any
defects (e.g. if delivered quantity does not
match required quantity), an employee might
get immediately notified via her/his cell
phone or tablet that is connected to the ERP
system.


Human-Machine
interaction
Autonomous
processes
Vertical
integration


Fistec’s Smart Warehouse/Mobile/Sales and
Distribution facilitates the control material
flows (e.g. inbound and outbound flows at a
plant) via mobile devices ([25]; p. 70).


Sources: BIBA [32], Kutschenreiter [25], L-Mobile [33], Bauernhansl et al. [3].


Fig. 3. Modified cross-company Kanban cycle according the Industry 4.0 scenario.


E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34 31






3.5. Additional findings


In addition to the concept-related propositions discussed in the
preceding sections, all experts were also asked to state their
opinion with regard to some concept-independent, generic
propositions.


PP1Generic: Industry 4.0 will cause a decoupling of the strategic
and the operative level of logistics management. While active
human decision making will still be required on the strategic level
(e.g. supplier selection, site selection), the operative level (e.g.
picking, loading) will be characterised by autonomously acting
entities (i.e. CPS), following a decentralised decision-making
approach.


Most of the experts agree with the statement that the degree of
automation and autonomy on the operative level of logistics
management will increase over the next years, meaning that
activities such as picking, loading and stocktaking will mostly be
executed by intelligent CPS. Human interaction on this level will
mainly be limited to control respectively monitoring activities. In
this sense, the majority of the interviewed experts expect Industry
4.0 to primarily manifest itself on the operative level. Yet, some of
the experts assume that changes on the operative level will likely
cause changes on the strategic level of logistics management, too. If
e.g. intelligent CPS replace human workforce in the manufacturing
process, certain products may not be produced in low-wage
countries anymore, which means that entire supply chains may
shift geographically, therefore affecting the strategic level of
supply chain and logistics management (e.g. choice of location).
However, the questioned experts see the majority of implications
on the operative level, as noted above.


PP2Generic: In the future, logistics processes and activities will be
increasingly coordinated in an end-to-end supply chain fashion,
meaning that actors will be loosely coupled into cross-network
platforms (e.g. cloud-based ERP or distributed ledger systems and
“logistics mall”). The efficiency and the flexibility of networks will
therefore increase.


The experts indeed expect an increasing cross-organisational
coordination of logistics processes and activities in the future,
enabled by the digitization of processes and technologies that
facilitate this form of collaboration. Expert 4 underlines this
argument, noting that leading companies such as SAP are strongly
engaged in the development of cross-organisational platforms in
term of IoS. However, multiple experts express their concern
whether a “real” end-to-end integration of supply chains is
feasible, noting that there exists a variety of barriers. An Expert
notes that in the automotive industry, for instance, integration of
suppliers, logistics service providers (LSPs) and buyers is already
on a very high level. He therefore doubts that actors are willing to
invest (substantially) into new solutions or platforms or technolo-
gies (such as the blockchain) that might render marginal benefits
only.


As far as the allocation of logistics services via a market place
(e.g. cloud-based “logistics mall”) is concerned, the majority of the
experts are uncertain in terms of feasibility. Two experts argue that
logistics services are often very specific, requiring a close and
trustful relationship between the involved actors. Hence, these
services may not be exchanged easily and therefore do not really fit
the idea of a “logistics mall”. Yet, the experts admit the potential of
a market place model when it comes to standardised logistics
services, e.g. transportation from point A to point B without any
specific requirements (e.g. air pressure, temperature etc.).


4. Discussion


The first cluster of the paper was dedicated to the fundamentals
of Industry 4.0. A brief literature review showed that there is no


commonly agreed-upon definition and understanding of the
approach yet. This finding was also confirmed by the interviews
that were conducted later on. Whereas some of the questioned
experts are convinced that the Fourth Industrial Revolution will
change existing industries significantly, others argue that Industry
4.0 is just a collective term for technologies and concepts that have
been known and applied for quite some time. According to its
promotors, the Industry 4.0 initiative aims to prepare the (German)
industry with respect to the future of manufacturing, which will be
characterised by e.g. an individualisation of products, an increasing
integration of customers and (business) partners into the value
creation process and a mergence of the virtual and physical world
through CPS, IoT an IoS. Yet, this description is quite vague and fails
to outline the constituent characteristics and features of Industry
4.0. Is it the use of CPS in an industrial context or the combination
of CPS, IoT and IoS? Or is it the digitization of value creation
processes through technologies such as RFID, cloud computing and
3D printing? Or is it the decentralised and autonomous production
logic?


In consideration of this theoretical and conceptual deficit, there
might be a risk that Industry 4.0 becomes a so-called management
fashion, which is a term referring to management concepts that
relatively quickly gain large shares in the public management
discourse [36]. However, management fashions usually fail to gain
practical relevance in the long run, meaning that they fade under
the weight of unfulfilled promises after a period of time [37].
Management fashions often evolve around highly topical issues
and result in a substantial number of publications, workshops and
conferences. Furthermore, management fashions are frequently
used by consulting companies as an instrument to boost demand.
In fact, it could be argued that Industry 4.0 fits some of the criteria
of a typical management fashion. Within a relatively short period
of time, the term has undoubtedly become a catchword and – in
the authors’ opinion – has partially fuelled excessive expectations.
The fast growing number of articles, workshops etc. further
underlines the popularity of Industry 4.0. Yet, a large part of those
publications do not meet scientific requirements, which is another
characteristic of management fashions, as Abrahamson [38] notes.
This paper, just like many others, has sought to come up with
arguments so as to demonstrate the opportunities and potentials
of Industry 4.0. Hence, we are convinced that Industry 4.0
constitutes a sustainable concept and not just another manage-
ment fashion. However, we plead for an objective, objectified and
“less hyped” handling with the topic. This primarily includes the
critical reflection of the potentials and promises.


The paper at hand is highly explorative in nature. We chose this
approach because of the fact that the Industry 4.0 concept is still in
its infancy. The interpretation and evaluation of the interviews
turned out to be vague due to the fact that the interviewees’ states
of knowledge and experience varied greatly. Matters were
complicated further by the fact that some of the experts were
very enthusiastic about Industry 4.0, whereas others revealed a
sceptical or even negative attitude. However, most of the
questioned experts stated that Industry 4.0 has potential in the
field of logistics management. This perception was supported by
the fact that the majority of experts agreed with the opportunities
that were described in the scenarios and propositions. Yet, some of
the experts expressed doubts with regard to the practical
feasibility of the scenarios. Apart from the implementation barriers
that are usually mentioned in the literature, such as data security
or standardisation of infrastructure, the experts perceive the
increasing complexity of production and cross-organisational
logistics networks as a critical barrier. This is quite interesting,
since the Industry 4.0 initiative – by definition – aims to prepare
and enable industries to deal with this increasing complexity.
Another noteworthy takeaway from the interviews is that some of


32 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34






the experts question the revolutionary character of Industry 4.0,
arguing that many ideas and concepts behind Industry 4.0 have
been around for quite some time. Those experts are inclined to
think that Industry 4.0 is just an “expression” in order to attract
attention.


5. Conclusion


5.1. Key findings


Within this paper we showed that there is no commonly
agreed-upon definition and understanding of Industry 4.0. In the
authors’ opinion, the Fourth Industrial Revolution can be best
described as a shift in the manufacturing logic towards an
increasingly decentralised, self-regulating approach of value
creation, enabled by concepts and technologies such as CPS, IoT,
IoS, cloud computing or additive manufacturing and smart
factories, so as to help companies meet future production
requirements. The comprehensive nature of this definition
requires companies to individually define what Industry 4.0
means to them. As a consequence, there is not one single truth and
reality behind this approach. Thus, this paper supports a somewhat
dynamic perception, proposing an application model that com-
prises different dimensions and components of Industry 4.0.


The investigations in the main part revealed different Industry
4.0 opportunities in terms of decentralisation, self-regulation and
efficiency. With respect to Kanban, an improved demand assess-
ment, dynamic and more efficient milkruns as well as shortened
cycle times can be expected. As far as JIT/JIS systems are concerned,
reduced bullwhip effects, highly transparent and integrated supply
chains as well as improvements in production planning are among
the potential benefits. The interviewed experts see the majority of
implications on the operative level of logistics management. Yet,
besides that, the scenarios also showed the significance of Industry
4.0 with respect to cross-organisational logistics, particularly in
terms of real time information flows, end-to-end supply chain
transparency and improvements in flexibility, thus helping
companies to optimise value-creation. Eventually, Industry 4.0
potentials should be evaluated situationally due to the complex
nature of logistics management.


5.2. Limitations


The goal of this paper was to identify and discuss the
implications of Industry 4.0 in the field of logistics management.
Considering this, it has to be noted that the investigations did not
primarily address logistics management in a general, overarching
manner. Instead, the focus was limited to two logistics concepts,
since it was the authors’ ambition to describe the effects in a
precise and detailed fashion. Against this backdrop, the present
study did not seek (and is not able) to make universally valid
statements about how the Fourth Industrial Revolution will affect
and impact logistics management. With respect to this, the
investigations and described scenarios feature a hypothetical
character and should therefore be understood in their respective
context. In addition to that, the focus of this paper was clearly on
the potentials and opportunities of Industry 4.0, meaning that the
risks, costs and implementation barriers that might accompany the
digital transformation were mostly ignored. Hence, the validity of
the different scenarios is limited, since only the beneficial aspects
of Industry 4.0 were discussed.


In order to review and evaluate the findings, eight expert
interviews were conducted. Yet, with regard to the interpretation
of the results, there is a number of factors that need to be
considered. On the one hand, the questioned persons all had a
profound knowledge in the field of logistics and supply chain


management. However, none of them considered himself/herself a
specialist in the area of Industry 4.0. Thus, the level of knowledge
and experience varied significantly among the interviewed
experts. As a consequence, some of the dialogues were highly
substantial and yielded interesting insights, whereas others
merely scratched the surface of the topic. Therefore, it was
difficult to directly compare the answers and opinions. Last but not
least, the number of interviews was limited. In order to gain more
representative and objective results, a larger base of interviews
would have been required.


5.3. Recommendations for future research


Existing academic literature lacks a clear and common
definition of the Industry 4.0 concept. Therefore, the image of
Industry 4.0 is still quite fuzzy, both among researchers and
especially among practitioners. This impression was confirmed by
the interviews that were conducted in the context of this paper.
Against this backdrop, future research should aim to establish a
more precise understanding of what the (constituent) character-
istics of Industry 4.0 are, especially for different business sectors or
areas of application.


In addition to that, we suggest that companies should be
accompanied and supported on their road to Industry 4.0 in a
practical manner. This could be achieved through concepts and
frameworks, which features different building blocks and dimen-
sions of Industry 4.0 and therefore may serve as an orientation
guideline. An applied SWOT framework, for instance, could
support companies by analysing the opportunities of Industry
4.0 in the context of a company’s strengths, weaknesses and
environment. Moreover, an “Industry 4.0 Readiness Framework”
could help identify potential implementation barriers by listing
critical success factors such as availability of technology, degree of
digitization, workforce capabilities and education.


Furthermore we see a strong need to concretise and substanti-
ate the Industry 4.0 concept with regard to financials, i.e. revenue
potentials and costs. In the context of the scenarios described in
this paper, this could e.g. be achieved through a rough quantifica-
tion of the benefits and cost advantages (e.g. reduction of inventory
costs, complexity costs, wage costs) as well as the required
investments (e.g. for infrastructure or employee training). We are
aware of the difficulty of such a quantification. However,
companies might not be willing to invest into Industry 4.0 unless
they have a rough imagination of the financials.


Last but not least, the implications described in this paper need
to be put into a wider context. The illustrated scenarios exclusively
addressed potential consequences in the context of the respective
logistics concepts. Yet, little was said about the implications
beyond that. Therefore, future research should also investigate the
effects of Industry 4.0 on e.g. the organisational, operational and
legal structures of companies.


References


[1] H. Rauen, Industry 4.0 – The Technological Revolution Continues [Video],
(2012) (Speaker) Retrieved January 12, 2016, from www.vdma.org/video-
item-display/-/videodetail/3019396www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/
videodetail/3019396.


[2] D. Spath (Ed.), O. Ganschar, S. Gerlach, M. Hämmerle, T. Krause, S. Schlund,
Studie: Produktionsarbeit Der Zukunft – Industrie 4.0 (2013). Retrieved June 8,
2015, from http://www.iao.fraunhofer.de/images/iao-news/
produktionsarbeit-der-zukunft.pdf.


[3] T. Bauernhansl, M. ten Hompel, B. Vogel-Heuser (Eds.), Industrie 4.0 in
Produktion, Automatisierung Und Logistik, Springer, Wiesbaden, 2014.


[4] M. Brettel, N. Friederichsen, M. Keller, M. Rosenberg, How virtualization,
decentralization and network building change the manufacturing landscape:
an industry 4.0 perspective, Int. J. Mech. Ind. Sci. Eng. 8 (1) (2014) 37–44.


[5] H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, J. Helbig, Bericht der Promotorengruppe
Kommunikation Im Fokus: Das Zukunftsprojekt Industrie 4.0 -


E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34 33



http://www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396

http://www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396

http://www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396www.vdma.org/video-item-display/-/videodetail/3019396

http://www.iao.fraunhofer.de/images/iao-news/produktionsarbeit-der-zukunft.pdf

http://www.iao.fraunhofer.de/images/iao-news/produktionsarbeit-der-zukunft.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0020




Handlungsempfehlungen zur Umsetzung (2012). Retrieved June 8, 2015, from
https://www.bmbf.de/pub_hts/kommunikation_bericht_2012-1.pdf.


[6] J. Meredith, Theory building through conceptual methods, Int. J. Oper. Prod.
Manage. 13 (5) (1993) 3–11.


[7] A. Dujin, A. Geissler, D. Horstkötter, Think Act. Industry 4.0 – The New
Industrial Revolution: How Europe Will Succeed, (2014) Retrieved July 13,
2015, from https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Publications/
pub_industry_4_0_the_new_industrial_revolution.html.


[8] M. Mittermair, Industry 4.0 initiatives, SMT: Surf. mt. Technol. 30 (3) (2015)
58–63.


[9] M. Hermann, T. Pentek, B. Otto, Design Principles for Industrie 4.0 Scenarios: A
Literature Review. Working Paper, Technical University of Dortmund, 2015.


[10] A. Akanmu, C.J. Anumba, Cyber-physical systems integration of building
information models and the physical construction Engineering, Constr. Archit.
Manage. 22 (5) (2015) 516–535.


[11] E.A. Lee, Cyber Physical Systems: Design Challenges, University of California at
Berkeley: Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences., 2008.


[12] J. Lee, B. Bagheri, H.A. Kao, A Cyber-Physical Systems Architecture for Industry
4.0-based Manufacturing Systems University of Cincinnati, University
Cooperative Research Center on Intelligent Maintenance Systems, 2014.


[13] S. Parvin, F. Hussain, O. Hussain, T. Thein, J. Park, Multicyber framework for
availability enhacement of cyber physical systems, Computing 95 (10-11)
(2013) 927–948.


[14] H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, J. Helbig, Recommendations for Implementing the
Strategic Initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0. Final Report of the Industrie 4.0 Working
Group, (2013) . Retrieved July 10, 2015, from http://www.acatech.de/
fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/Acatech/root/de/
Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/
Final_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf.


[15] M.E. Porter, J.E. Heppelmann, How smart connected products are transforming
competition, Harv. Bus. Rev. 11 (2014) 1–23.


[16] J. Nolin, N. Olson, The internet of things and convenience, Internet Res. 26 (2)
(2016) 360–376.


[17] E. Fleisch, What Is the Internet of Things? An Economic Perspective. (White
Paper), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich/University of St. Gallen,
2010.


[18] P. Andersson, L.-G. Mattsson, Service innovations enabled by the internet of
things, IMP J. 9 (1) (2015) 85–106.


[19] W. Wahlster, H.J. Grallert, S. Wess, H. Friedrich, T. Widenka (Eds.), Towards the
Internet of Services: The THESEUS Research Program, Springer, Switzerland,
2014.


[20] A. Barros, D. Oberle (Eds.), Handbook of Service Description, Springer, New
York, 2012.


[21] T. Qu, S.P. Lei, Z.Z. Wang, X. NieD.X. Chen, G.Q. Huang, IoT-based real-time
ProductionLogistics synchronization system under intelligent cloud
manufacturing, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 84 (1) (2015) 147–164.


[22] T. Qu, M. Thürer, J.H. Wang, Z.Z. Wang, H. Fu, C.D. Li, G.Q. Huang, System
dynamics approach for the performance evaluation of internet-of-Things
system implementation in a dynamic production logistics system, Int. J. Prod.
Res. (2016), doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2016.1173738.


[23] Y.F. Zhang, C. Qian, J.X. Lv, Y. Liu, Agent and cyber-physical system based self-
organizing and self-adaptive intelligent shopfloor, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. (2016),
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tii.2016.2618892.


[24] A. Banyai, Cloud logistics, Adv. Logist. Syst. 8 (1) (2014) 11–16.
[25] Kutschenreiter, U., (Ed.) (2015). Mehrwert durch Software. Retrieved October


2016, from www.vdma-verlag.com/home/download_7E0A.html.
[26] MAN, MAN TeleMatics, (2016) Retrieved January 27, 2016, from http://www.


truck.man.eu/de/en/solutions/man-telematics/overview/Overview.html.
[27] Ultriva, Collaborative Supply Portal, (2016) Retrieved January 27, 2016, from


http://www.ultriva.com/products/collaborative-supply-portal.
[28] Volkswagen, Car-to-X. Ein Kommunikationssystem für Viele Anwendungen,


(2016) . (from) from http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/
content/de/innovation/communication_and_networking/connected_world/
car_to_x.html.


[29] S.M. Lee, M. Ebrahimpour, Just-In-Time, Manage. Decis. 25 (6) (1987) 50–54.
[30] K. Aoki, R. Mouer, Just-in-Time production, The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia


of Consumption and Consumer Studies, (2015) , pp. 1–2.
[31] B.D. Henderson, The logic of kanban, J. Bus. Strategy 6 (3) (1986) 6–12.
[32] Bremer Institut für Produktion und Logistik GmbH [BIBA], The Industry 4.0-


Competence and Transfer Centre at BIBA, (2016) . Retrieved January 26, 2016,
from http://www.biba.uni-bremen.de/industrie4.html?&L=1.


[33] L-Mobile, RFID Kanban, (2016) Retrieved October, 2016, from https://
industrie40.l-mobile.com/komponenten/industrie-4-0/rfid-kanban/.


[34] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, M. Pease, The byzantine generals problem, ACM Trans.
Program. Lang. Syst. 4 (3) (1982) 382–401.


[35] D.L.K. Chuen, Handbook of Digital Currencies, 1st ed., Elsevier, London, UK,
2015.


[36] D.Ø. Madsen, T. Stenheim, Doing research on ‘Management fashions’:
methodological challenges and opportunities, Prob. Persp. Manage. 11 (4)
(2013) 68–76.


[37] V.R. Alexandru, The drive for change in public organizations: a critical analysis
of management fashions, Int. J. Organiz. Behav. 18 (4) (2015) 454–493.


[38] E. Abrahamson, Management fashion, Acad. Manage. Rev. 21 (1) (1996) 254–
285.


[39] E. Fleisch, M. Weinberger, F. Wortmann, Business Models and the Internet of
Things. Bosch IoT Lab White Paper, University of St.Gallen, 2014.


34 E. Hofmann, M. Rüsch / Computers in Industry 89 (2017) 23–34



https://www.bmbf.de/pub_hts/kommunikation_bericht_2012-1.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0030

https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Publications/pub_industry_4_0_the_new_industrial_revolution.html

https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Publications/pub_industry_4_0_the_new_industrial_revolution.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0065

arxiv:/Retrieved%20July%2010,%202015,%20from%20http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Final_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf

arxiv:/Retrieved%20July%2010,%202015,%20from%20http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Final_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf

arxiv:/Retrieved%20July%2010,%202015,%20from%20http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Final_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf

arxiv:/Retrieved%20July%2010,%202015,%20from%20http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Final_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0120

http://www.vdma-verlag.com/home/download_7E0A.html

http://www.truck.man.eu/de/en/solutions/man-telematics/overview/Overview.html

http://www.truck.man.eu/de/en/solutions/man-telematics/overview/Overview.html

http://www.ultriva.com/products/collaborative-supply-portal

arxiv:/from%20http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/content/de/innovation/communication_and_networking/connected_world/car_to_x.html

arxiv:/from%20http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/content/de/innovation/communication_and_networking/connected_world/car_to_x.html

arxiv:/from%20http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/content/de/innovation/communication_and_networking/connected_world/car_to_x.html

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0155

arxiv:/Retrieved%20January%2026,%202016,%20from%20http://www.biba.uni-bremen.de/industrie4.html?%26L=1

arxiv:/Retrieved%20January%2026,%202016,%20from%20http://www.biba.uni-bremen.de/industrie4.html?%26L=1

https://industrie40.l-mobile.com/komponenten/industrie-4-0/rfid-kanban/

https://industrie40.l-mobile.com/komponenten/industrie-4-0/rfid-kanban/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(17)30190-2/sbref0195


