









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers & Industrial Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/caie


A review of Internet of Things (IoT) embedded sustainable supply chain for
industry 4.0 requirements
Manavalan E., Jayakrishna K.⁎
School of Mechanical Engineering, VIT University, Vellore, India


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Sustainable supply chain (SSC)
Closed loop supply chain (CLSC)
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
Industry 4.0
IoT
IIoT


A B S T R A C T


Supply Chain organizations in the present global environment operate in market that is increasingly complex
and dynamic in nature. Sustainable supply chain becomes inevitable to meet the aggressive change in the
customer requirements. Based on the reviews, it is revealed that manufacturing companies need to speed up in
shifting the focus towards sustainability and make use of technology like ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) to meet the
organization’s goal. The objective of this research paper is to review the various aspects of SCM, ERP, IoT and
Industry 4.0 and explore the potential opportunities available in IoT embedded sustainable supply chain for
Industry 4.0 transformation. In this review, a comprehensive study on various factors, that affects the sustainable
supply chain were analyzed and the results recorded. Based on the review, a framework for assessing the
readiness of supply chain organization from various perspectives has been proposed to meet the requirements of
the fourth Industrial Revolution. The conceptual framework model has been formulated from five important
perspectives of supply chain management namely Business, Technology, Sustainable Development,
Collaboration and Management Strategy. This study furnishes the criteria that can be assessed by companies to
realize the readiness for industry 4.0 transformation.


1. Introduction


Digital disruption has become the order of the day. The convergence
of information systems has become more complicated and dynamic in
nature, which drives industrial organizations to invest on smart man-
ufacturing (Wang, Wallace, Shen, & Choi, 2015; Ye & Wang, 2013). It is
imperative for organizations to embrace the changing technology to
cope up with shorter product life cycle and rapid environmental
changes (Lucke, Constantinescu, & Westkämper, 2008). Information
Systems (IS) tries to integrate the communication between people and
technology. An IS, including Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
system, provides seamless user experience in real time which is so


intuitive to take informed decisions and support to manage the overall
operations of the organization effectively (Zhang et al., 2014).


SCM is an integral part of ERP, which connects with various part-
ners in Supply chain. Supply Chain comprises of vendors, producers,
wholesaler, retailer and end client and it intends to synchronize de-
mand and supply (Stefanou, 1999). The coordinated value creation
process from raw material purchase to end-client usage can be effec-
tively accomplished through ERP. The benefits of information systems
are increased efficiency, increased productivity, reduced time, cost re-
duction, zero errors, optimized inventory (Barut, Faisst, & Kanet, 2002).


Globalization in the current scenario is confronted by constant
growth of global demand in capital and consumer goods by persistently


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030
Received 7 November 2017; Received in revised form 5 November 2018; Accepted 16 November 2018


Abbreviations: SC, Supply Chain; SSC, Sustainable Supply Chain; CLSC, Closed Loop Supply Chain; ERP, Enterprise Resource Planning; EOL, End-Of-Life; SCM,
Supply Chain Management; SCN, Supply Chain Network; IoT, Internet of Things; IIoT, Industrial Internet of Things; CPS, Cyber Physical Systems; GSCM, Green
Supply Chain Management; OT, Operational Technology; IT, Information Technology; IS, Information Systems; SRM, Supplier Relationship Management; CRM,
Customer Relationship Management; AHP, Analytical Hierarchy Process; ISM, Interpretive Structural Modeling; MICMAC, Impact Matrix Cross-Reference
Multiplication Applied to a Classification; CFA, Confirmatory Factor Analysis; ISM, Interpretive Structural Modeling; DEA, Data Envelopment Analysis; NGT, Nominal
Group Technique; VIKOR, VlseKriterijumska Optimizacija I Kompromisno Resenje; ELECTRE, ELimination and Choice Expressing REality; RDT, Resource
Dependence Theory; TRIZ, Theory of Inventive Problem Solving; RFID, Radio-frequency identification; TQM, Total Quality Management; HMI, Human Machine
Interaction; RL, Reverse Logistics; RSC, Reverse Supply Chain; FSC, Forward Supply Chain; SME, Small and Medium Enterprises; M2M, Machine to Machine; IoP,
Internet of People; IoE, Internet of Everything; IoS, Internet of Services; IIoT, Industrial Internet of Things; CMfg, Cloud Manufacturing; CCIoT, Cloud Computing and
Internet of Things; ICPS, Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems; IWN, Industrial Wireless Network


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mail2jaikrish@gmail.com (K. Jayakrishna).



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03608352













































https://www.elsevier.com/locate/caie

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030

mailto:mail2jaikrish@gmail.com

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.030&domain=pdf




verifying overall interest for social, environmental and economic as-
pects (Pisching et al., 2015a, 2015b). To overcome this challenge, in-
dustrial supply chain is to be equipped to sustain and right now, supply
chain value creation is formed by the advancement of Industry 4.0
(Bocken, Short, Rana, & Evans, 2014; Chen & Paulraj, 2004; Chen et al.,
2004, 2014; Jayal, Badurdeen, Dillon, & Jawahir, 2010; Li, Ragu-
Nathan, Ragu-Nathan, & Rao, 2006).


1.1. Challenges with supply chain


In today’s dynamic and changing supply chain environment, orga-
nization faces many challenges in manufacturing space such as global
competitiveness, lack of adaptability, go to market time as illustrated in
Fig. 1 (Arif-Uz-Zaman & Nazmul Ahsan, 2014; Narasimhan & Kim,
2001).


In the past, most of the manufacturing processes were developed
with the objective of economic viability for achieving higher pro-
ductivity (Czajkiewicz, 2008). In recent past, globalization policy
eliminates the restriction of market boundaries. The small and medium
scale manufacturers are finding it difficult to compete with the global
large manufacturers, as they are unable to adapt in the newer tech-
nologies to process difficult materials, optimize space utilization and
consume less energy (Thomas & Trentesaux, 2013). Another challenge
is introducing a new product and make it available to consumers at the
right time.


The common challenge faced by manufacturers is to forecast the
right demand versus supply and to reduce the manufacturing lead-time
(Jovane et al., 2008). Consequently, it becomes inevitable for them to
equip with right resources and processes along with technology to bring
up revolutionary products and world-class services (Tajima, 2007).


Factors that influences uncertainty in supply chain management are
global competition, lack of adaptability, delayed entry into market. The
technology IoT overcomes these challenges, which significantly trans-
forms the supply chain industry (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010; Giusto
et al., 2010). For instance, this technology can be leveraged to track the
consignment location and speed of the vehicle and so that the users are
alerted by late deliveries. IoT technology can be deployed on mon-
itoring the condition of an equipment from a remote location (Qiu, Luo,
Xu, Zhong, & Huang, 2015). Temperature sensitive products can be
monitored with sensors and the data can be communicated through
internet. For example, perishable products are wasted during transit.
The confluence of internet, wireless, predictive analytics and cloud
technologies can change the entire supply chain operations and bring
more value out of it (Yang, Wu, Liang, Bi, & Wu, 2011). Using IoT, this
wastage can be minimized as it monitors the condition of perishable
products and sends the status to the stakeholders of supply chain
(Accorsi, Bortolini, Baruffaldi, Pilati, & Ferrari, 2017).


Although many researchers are analyzing the IoT, SCM individually,
the application of IoT in enterprises to meet the industry 4.0 require-
ments have not been reviewed much and it is still at the initial phase.
From the literature study, it is revealed that organizations need to focus
more on digital technologies and take initiatives to deploy industry 4.0.
Further, studies unveil that this research is slightly limited to theore-
tical suitability and suggest for exploring more practice-oriented ap-
proach in the days to come.


The main objective of the paper is to review the various aspects of
SCM, ERP, IoT and Industry 4.0 and examine the importance of digi-
talization and the role of IoT in the overall Supply Chain. Further, this
study explores the criteria that can be assessed by companies to realize
the readiness for industry 4.0 transformation.


Fig. 1. Key challenges for supply chain organizations.


Fig. 2. Outline of the review carried out with four major areas.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna


























The structure of the research paper is depicted in Fig. 2. The paper is
organized under four major areas such as SCM, ERP, Industry 4.0 and
IoT. The review on SCM with importance to GSCM and SSCM are
analyzed. Later, literature on impact of ERP on various industries are
studied. Further, Industry 4.0 is reviewed in depth to know the building
blocks, influence of technology in various industries. In addition, IoT
and its applications are reviewed from both industry and consumer
perspective. Role of IoT on SCM is analyzed. Based on the analysis, a
framework is proposed for assessing the readiness for Industry 4.0
transformation.


2. Literature review


There is a considerable growth and improvement in the industrial
environment with respect to Supply Chain, ERP, Industry 4.0 and IoT
for the past ten years. Literary articles were reviewed and analyzed
from the past ten years on industrial growth perspective.


2.1. Structure of literature study


Based on the analysis, the literature section has been logically
classified into four subdivisions. Initially, the focus is given to review
the GSC and SSC practices in SCM. Later, it outlines the relationship
between ERP and SCM. The study on Industry 4.0 and its emergence in
various industries were studied. Further, it outlines the various in-
vestigations on IoT and how it influences into the digital world were
discussed. The presence of IoT in industry is expanding rapidly
Academicians and practioners have done many of IoT research and
development in recent years. Further, focus should be given to mod-
ernize supply chain with IoT to increase the digital revenue (Iera,
Floerkemeier, Mitsugi, & Morabito, 2010; Vermesan & Friess, 2013). In
addition, companies are moving towards digitalization to make cost
effective devices, business inter-connected on real time, collaboration
across boundaries (Michahelles, Ilic, Kunze, Kritzler, & Schneegass,
2017; Ning & Wang, 2011). As manufacturing sector influences the
global economy, organizations now looks beyond just automation and
focuses on machine-to-machine communication at real time with the
help of information systems (Karre, Hammer, Kleindienst, & Ramsauer,
2017). Thus, fourth industrial revolution appears more imperative now.
Information systems, which are integrated to physical devices, can be
termed as embedded systems, in other words Cyber Physical System
(CPS) (Arrieta, Sagardui, & Etxeberria, 2014). A CPS is a system mon-
itored by sensor integrated with the internet and communicates with its
users (Kim, Kim, Lakshmanan, & Rajkumar, 2013).


From the Fig. 3a, it is interpreted that though the number of re-
search reported on SSCM is gradually growing, the research on SSCM
with Industry 4.0 and IoT is in the initial stage. For example, for the
year 2017, though there were 6979 articles in SSCM, with the context of
Industry 4.0, only 740 articles were published. Further, if IoT is also
taken into consideration along with industry 4.0 in SSCM, there were
only 115 articles. Thus, the present study attempts to focus on SSCM
with industry 4.0 and also to study the role of IoT in SCM and sug-
gestions were given for taking up Industry 4.0 to the next level.


The number of publications on the IoT and Industry 4.0 are shown
in Fig. 3b. Technology diffusion speed can be calculated based on
number of publications in the respective technology. For example, for
IoT, the number of publications in the year 2012 is 3129 and the same
in the year 2017 is 6173, which is 97.28% increase in the publications.
Similarly, for Industry 4.0, the number of publications in the year 2012
is 7251 and the same in the year 2017 is 14,664, which is 102.23%
increase in the publications. This data represents that the technology
diffusion speed in last 5 years is almost double. This analysis reveals
that although research on technology related publications has in-
creased, the study on SSCM with IoT to meet industry 4.0 has not been
focused much and hence it is identified as the literature gap for the
present study.


2.2. SCM: present and future directions


The SCM has made tremendous growth in last six decades from the
initial focus on improving manual labor process to the latest automa-
tion and connecting supply chain network effectively (Li, Rao, Ragu-
Nathan, & Ragu-Nathan, 2005; Parkhi, Joshi, Gupta, & Sharma, 2015).
Fig. 4 demonstrates the evolution of SC over the last six decades with a
graph. In 1960s, manufactures concentrated on large-scale manu-
facturing to reduce the unit production cost as a primary objective and
the system was not seamless (Bechtel & Jayaram, 1997).


In 1980s, integration of inventory management and material dis-
tribution took place (Inman & Hubler, 1992). This process empowered
industrialization in 1990s and stimulated the concept of integrating all
cross-functional modules such as production, warehouse, logistics and
eventually all these elements became part of supply chain with primary
objective of improving the operational effectiveness (Ragatz, Handfield,
& Scannell, 1997). With the help of digital applications and mobile
devices, the seamless integration in supply chain to connect partners
was achieved (Linton, 2017). It enabled supply chain administration to
control the data of product, finance streams efficiently (Barratt, 2004).
Subsequently supply chain became cumbersome with continuous
growth and complex networks as too many process to monitor and
control (Fawcett, Fawcett, Watson, & Magnan, 2012). Later organiza-
tions felt the competition across the globe and started focusing on re-
ducing the wastages in the material, machine-running time, removing
the redundant processes (Mohammaddust, Rezapour, Farahani,
Mofidfar, & Hill, 2017). Eventually this resulted in organizations look
for lean manufacturing and look for world-class technologies to bring
supreme quality and bring the manufacturing rate down by eliminating
the waste and non-value added routine work (Qi, Huo, Wang, & Yeung,
2017). The focus on lean became predominant with the key influencing
factors such as time, cost and material (Ruiz-Benitez, López, & Real,
2017).


More recently, the rapid raise of automation in supply chain has
become a major factor of the evolution process (MacCarthy, Blome,
Olhager, Srai, & Zhao, 2016). Later the SSC has evolved from a per-
spective of social and environmental areas where many organizations
started looking at supply chain not only from profitability perspective
but to make eco-friendly products so that future generations also get
benefited (Wang, Lee, Zhu, & Li, 2017). In addition, organizations have
started measuring their sustainability in terms of their business opera-
tions and action plans are also being developed and implemented
(Jabbarzadeh, Fahimnia, & Sheu, 2017; Rezaee, Dehghanian, Fahimnia,
& Beamon, 2017).


2.2.1. SCM definitions
The scope and definition of SCM is evolving continuously. Bagchi,


Chun Ha, Skjoett-Larsen, and Boege Soerensen (2005) suggests for
having a standard SCM definition for better understanding, as defini-
tions of SCM vary across academicians and practitioners. Table 1 lists
the important SCM perspective definitions as defined by researches.


To sum up, supply chain definitions brings multiple perspectives by
various authors and give different dimensions to it. Supply chain
comprises of product, services, finances and information shared across
the value chain (Handfield & Linton, 2017). Supply chain not only
connects supplier, manufacturers and customers, it also connects sev-
eral layers of supplier in upstream side and similarly it connects to the
ultimate end users who are benefited from the value of the product or
services in downstream side (Dutta & Hora, 2017). These definitions
insist that the entire supply chain eco-system should be economically
managed and the supply chain network should be integrated to obtain
optimum productivity (Ângelo, Barata, da Cunha, & Almeida, 2017).


2.2.2. Factors influencing supply chain
Supply Chain management demonstrates better results in terms of


better delivery time, improved customer satisfaction, better rapport


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






with suppliers (Quesada, Gazo, & Sanchez, 2012). For better under-
standing of supply chain and its operations, it is inevitable to recognize
the influencing factors which affect SCM (Fawcett, Ellram, & Ogden,
2013; Govindarajan & Ramamurti, 2011; Li, 2002; Williamson, 2008).


As illustrated in Fig. 5, the factors which influences supply chain
management are


• Performance – responsiveness to change is an important measure to
evaluate the performance (Senvar, Tuzkaya, & Kahraman, 2014)
• Technology – dynamic change in customer requirements especially
hi-tech and consumer electronics need to take care (Gowen &
Tallon, 2005)
• Environmental policy – Influence of Government regulations on
environment is one of key strategic factor to consider (Vachon &
Klassen, 2007)
• Economics – Finance is the essential part of which decides the
strength of SCM (Pfohl & Gomm, 2009)
• Supply chain collaboration – SRM and CRM are the key functions of
business practices (Camilleri, 2017; Zhu & Sarkis, 2004)
• Competition – the revenue generation is based on competition in the


market (Rossetti, Handfield, & Dooley, 2011)
• Strategy – focus on sustainability is key for going forward strategy
(Khonpikul, Jakrawatana, Sangkaew, & Gheewala, 2017)
• Customer engagement – Every stakeholder has different view, cus-
tomer engagement is required to know the real expectation (Simchi-
Levi & Simchi-Levi, 2003)
• Real time information – business expects that the planning and ex-
ecuting the plan depends on sharing the real time information (Ou,
Liu, Hung, & Yen, 2010)
• Procurement – forecast the demand and ensures the supply is or-
dered optimally so that no over stock and no stock situation
(Morgan & Monczka, 1995)
• Zero errors – in certain industry such as food supply chain, aero-
space there is zero percent tolerance (Singer, Donoso, & Traverso,
2003).


2.2.3. Supply chain drivers
This section discusses the key drivers, which enhances the organi-


zation’s performance related to material, logistics, and operations. Each
of these drivers insist the overall supply chain responsiveness (Huang,


2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


SSCM 2083 2231 2712 3305 3901 4780 5309 6118 6979 6003


SSCM Industry 4.0 152 143 165 182 242 290 728 767 740 572


SSCM Industry 4.0 IoT 8 5 5 5 7 19 52 79 115 128


0


1000


2000


3000


4000


5000


6000


7000


8000


N
u


m
b


er
  o


f 
P


u
b


lic
ati


o
n


s 


Year  


SSCM


SSCM Industry 4.0


SSCM Industry 4.0 IoT


Fig. 3a. Number of publications in SSCM, Industry 4.0 and IoT and the trends.


2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018*


IoT 3129 3321 3826 4653 5032 6173 5319


Industry 4.0 7251 8310 8817 16375 15497 14664 11180


0
2000
4000
6000
8000


10000
12000
14000
16000
18000


N
u


m
b


er
 o


f 
P


u
b


lic
ati


o
n


s 


Year 


* Data shown upto 10th July 18 IoT Industry 4.0


Fig. 3b. Number of publications in IoT and Industry 4.0.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






Huang, & Yang, 2017). Based on review, Table 2 outlines the SC drivers.


2.2.4. Advancements in supply chain operations
Supply Chain operations are important for business operations and


have a considerable influence on costs and profits. SCM operations in-
clude process, infrastructure, systems to manage the flow of informa-
tion, material and services from supplier to end consumer.
Technological advances such as IoT, Industry 4.0 and automation helps
to maximize the effectiveness of operations within the organization as
well as across the Supply Chain partners. Khan, Hasan, Ray, Saha, and
Abdul (2013) suggested autonomous sales order processing system
using SMS based web integrated order processing software for food
processing industry to improve the supply chain performance. Bienhaus
and Haddud (2018) studied the impact of industry 4.0 on procurement,
identified the potential bottlenecks and explored ways to overcome the
bottlenecks and transform business into complete digital organization.
Dolgui, Ivanov, Sethi, and Sokolov (2018) in their study, analyzed on
production scheduling, Supply Chain and industry 4.0. Further, they
explained the qualitative methods for optimal control of industrial en-
gineering and production management. Hou, Chaudhry, Chen, and Hu
(2017) presented the evolution of sustainable development in SCM.
Saberi, Cruz, Sarkis, and Nagurney (2018) proposed a freight carriers
linkage framework in multi-period Supply Chain where Supply Chain
partners can maximize the net worth of their investment with ecolo-
gical friendly technology. Tsang et al. (2018) presented IoT embedded
risk detecting system for item quality and worker safety in cold en-
vironment.


2.3. Overview on GSCM


The effect of eco-friendly factors expands the SCM into a new


horizon, which is termed as ‘Green SCM’ (GSCM). There are several
contributions made on GSCM practices (Sarkis, 2003; Srivastava, 2007).
Interestingly more than 300 research articles were authored by various
researches in the past 15 years on the theme of GSCM and SSCM
(Asrawi, Saleh, & Othman, 2017; Brandenburg, Govindan, Sarkis, &
Seuring, 2014; Mathivathanan, Kannan, & Haq, 2018; Seuring, 2013).
The primary focus in earlier stage of supply chain was financial char-
acteristics, later the center of focus was to consider the environmental
influences that influence the SC (Battini, Bogataj, & Choudhary, 2017;
Piplani, Pujawan, & Ray, 2008; Sari, 2017; Seuring & Müller, 2008b).


Vachon and Klassen (2008) proposes a collaboration model, which
supports environmental footprint assessment aimed at increasing the
correctness and relevance of life cycle in supply chain. Vachon (2007)
brings a relation between environment and supply chain practices to
have little impact on pollution and encourage green supply chain
practices. Mathiyazhagan, Govindan, NoorulHaq, and Geng (2013)
studies an electronic industry to describe the significance of GSCM to
ensure eco-friendly environment.


2.3.1. Method used for GSCM implementation
Several studies have been conducted to evaluate the method


adopted to implement GSCM. Table 3 describes the summary of GSCM
implementation with various approaches.


On the basis of literature, different approaches are used to evaluate
supply chain industry to guard the environment. Bringing eco-friendly
is one of the primary objectives of the global organizations all over the
world. The study also discloses that the benefits are tremendous if the
organizations adhere to produce environmental friendly products in the
context of social, environmental and financial factors.


Fig. 4. Evolution of Supply Chain.


Table 1
List of definitions of SCM.
S. No. Definition perspective Source


1 Consumption of goods from macro organization perspective Lummus and Vokurka (1999)
2 Business process perspective Lambert and Cooper (2000)
3 Supply chain collaboration perspective Mentzer et al. (2001)
4 Functions Integration perspective Akkermans, Bogerd, and Vos (1999)
5 Organizational behavior perspective Gunasekaran and Ngai (2003)
6 Optimization of value chain perspective Gunasekaran and Kobu (2007)
7 Lean perspective Melnyk, Lummus, Vokurka, Burns, and Sandor (2009)
8 Agile perspective Machowiak (2012)
9 Digital procurement perspective Hsin Chang, Tsai, and Hsu (2013)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna


















Fig. 5. Factors Influencing Supply Chain.


Table 2
List of SC drivers.
S. No. SC drivers Description Source


1 Supply chain information
systems


The key drivers for information systems are strategic planning, infrastructure, IT
knowledge, business-to-business or business to consumer models, enterprise
management, and implementation.


Agus and Ahmad (2017)


2 Responsive supply chain Supply chain must be responsive. Ability to respond meaningfully within a stipulated
lead-time to change in demand or market requirements.


Banchuen, Sadler, and Shee (2017)


3 Supply chain analytics Using business intelligence, improving the effectiveness of supply chain is a critical
offering in organization’s competiveness.


Sahay and Ranjan (2008)


4 Supply chain automation Due to globalization, supply chain networks are highly intersected and located at
different geographies. Automation combined with advanced technologies such as
internet connected software oriented technologies is the key to manage such supply
chain networks.


Viswanadham (2002)


5 Supply chain transportation
and logistics


Enormous financial impact of transportation costs on organizations related to
environment is predicted.


Speranza (2018)


6 Big data for supply chain The emerging technology big data stimulates the growth of organization and make right
decisions at critical times especially in supply chain, manufacturing, healthcare and
finance sector.


Zhong, Newman, Huang, and Lan (2016);
Addo-Tenkorang and Helo (2016)


7 Supply chain collaboration Relationship with supply chain partners improves the visibility and response time to the
change in market requirements.


Cao and Zhang (2011)


Table 3
List of implementation methods.
S. No. Approach Description Source


1 Fuzzy multi criteria
approach


Global business environment has enforced many organizations to build eco-friendly
products. Fuzzy multi criteria approach is used to assess environmental friendly
vendor’s performance.


Shen, Olfat, Govindan, Khodaverdi, and Diabat
(2013)


2 ISM ISM is used to visualize the key pressures faced by manufacturing industries from
government and regulation policies categories to implement GSCM.


Diabat and Govindan (2011)


3 DEA model DEA is one of the techniques that can be used for evaluating GSCM to develop
environmental performance.


Tavana, Mirzagoltabar, Mirhedayatian, Saen, and
Azadi (2013)


4 NGT and VIKOR with
fuzzy method


Developing environmental friendly suppliers is crucial for GSCM. NGT is a method,
which can be used to evaluate green supplier initiatives. VIKOR helps to rank the green
supplier and proposes relevant programs for deployment.


Noshad and Awasthi (2015)


5 ELECTRE and VIKOR
approach


The ELECTRE and VIKOR approaches were used to assess environmental aspect of
supply chain, which considers services.


Chithambaranathan, Subramanian, Gunasekaran,
and Palaniappan (2015)


6 AHP This method studies the factors of GSCM and evaluates the adoption level to meet
customer requirements fulfilling eco-friendly principles.


Mathiyazhagan, Diabat, Al-Refaie, and Xu (2015)


7 Mixed Methods (ISM,
MICMAC, CFA)


GSCM enablers are critical in managing financial and environmental performance,
which uses various methods. The key factors influences GSCM are management strategy,
SRM, CRM etc.


Dubey, Gunasekaran, Papadopoulos, and Childe
(2015)


8 RDT This method helps in evaluating the performance of SSCM and their relationship with
organizational performance.


Esfahbodi, Zhang, and Watson (2016)


9 TRIZ This method is used to identify the Green Supply Chain (GSC) issues. Moussa, Rasovska, Dubois, De Guio, and
Benmoussa (2017)


10 Big data analytic
approach


This method is an optimization technique, which evaluates GSCM with many objectives
that capitalizes big data.


Liu, Choo, and Zhao (2017)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






2.3.2. Drivers of GSCM practices
The key drivers of GSCM practices are illustrated in the Fig. 4. The


key drivers of GSCM are studied by the following authors:


• TQM (Gavronski, Klassen, Vachon, & do Nascimento, 2011; Kaynak,
2003)
• CRM (Rao & Holt, 2005)• SRM (Bai & Sarkis, 2010; Carter & Jennings, 2004; Rao, 2005)• Carbon Emissions (Hong & Phitayawejwiwat, 2005)• Institutional Pressure (Kauppi, 2013; Zhu & Sarkis, 2007)• Green adoption (Testa & Iraldo, 2010; Vachon & Klassen, 2006)
The digital SCM ecosystem have picked up its pace for the deploy-


ment, management, and integration of services that can power
Industrial Internet applications (Angeles, 2005). The interconnected
ecosystem can adapt and respond to shifting demands by itself. To
achieve this, CPS is seen as next generation system, which integrates
information systems, RFID, sensors, devices, equipment (Schirner,
Erdogmus, Chowdhury, & Padir, 2013). CPS monitors physical pro-
cesses and communicates the status to human in real time who can
access it from anywhere which improves the human-machine interac-
tion (HMI) (Lee, 2008; Shafiq, Sanin, Szczerbicki, & Toro, 2015).


Based on the review, digital SC should be considered as key driver of
GSCM as illustrated in the Fig. 6.


2.3.3. Uncertainty in supply chain from green perspective
The conception of uncertainty is an important area within risk


management. Uncertainty leads to delay in product delivery, reduces
the performance of supply chain. It is essential to deal with un-
certainties by better planning, with buffer inventory level and timely
deliveries. In this section, literature on uncertainty in supply chain from
green perspective has been reviewed.


Tseng, Lim, Wong, Chen, and Zhan (2018) established a model for
assessing the services of SC and uncertainty over environment service
operations. Foerstl, Meinlschmidt, and Busse (2018) explores the sus-
tainability related uncertainties in various industries of supply chain
and proposes information-processing method for sustainable supply


management. Ghelichi, Saidi-Mehrabad, and Pishvaee (2018) suggests
a stochastic programming model, which was applied to green SCN
under uncertainty. Entezaminia, Heidari, and Rahmani (2017) studied
on production planning in GSCM under uncertainty over RSC. Some of
the green practices such as wastage reduction, carbon emissions related
to logistics were studied. Wu, Liao, Tseng, and Chiu (2015) explored the
decisive factors in GSCM under uncertainty for automobile manu-
facturer and found that recovering and recycling used products are the
primary factors, which affects the economic performance.


2.4. Overview on SSCM


SSC is one of the important concept in SCM which establishes sev-
eral discussions in the recent past (Brandenburg & Rebs, 2015;
Majumder & Groenevelt, 2001; Vachon & Mao, 2008). The drastic in-
crease in combining sustainability into SCM is an emerging area where
it demonstrates the open relations with SCM and its interactions
(Ashby, Leat, & Hudson-Smith, 2012; Fallahpour, Olugu, Musa, Wong,
& Noori, 2017; Madani & Rasti-Barzoki, 2017; Springett, 2003). Sus-
tainable supply chain takes care of goods, information, financial flows
with the key measurements of sustainability, which are derived from all
the stakeholders of supply chain (Tan, Kannan, Handfield, & Ghosh,
1999).


SSCM is integrating the key organizational information systems to
generate well defined supply chain by keeping the socio-economic en-
vironmental considerations which effectively manages goods, in-
formation and finance flows associated with cross functional modules
such as materials management, production, sales, order fulfillment
(Pagell & Shevchenko, 2014). Kadambala, Subramanian, Tiwari,
Abdulrahman, and Liu (2017) studied the CLSC, which comprises of
supplier, manufacturer, distributor, retailer and customer. It reviews
the transportation life cycle of the containers.


2.4.1. Definitions of SSCM
This subdivision narrates the SSCM definitions from literature


available as tabulated in Table 4 and the definitions are classified based
on key characteristics of sustainability.


Fig. 6. Drivers of GSCM.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna










The key outcome is that the socio-environmental perception has
been the central focal point for SCM practices. Although there were
many definitions given from business and social perspective, the tech-
nology focus was not recorded by any of the published definitions.
Overall, the outcome shows that the definitions for SSCM stressed lar-
gely on environment problems.


2.4.2. Review on CLSC
Organizations started adopting CLSC recently to improve value


addition, make the environment more eco-friendly. The new technology
facilitates return of goods well-handled and tracked resulting in cost
savings (Atasu, Guide, & Wassenhove, 2008). Managing uncertainties in
reverse logistics such as quality, cost calculation, customer perception
are the key challenges in deriving the success of CLSC (Battini et al.,
2017; Wei, Govindan, Li, & Zhao, 2015). Thus, studying the un-
certainties in managing SC and their influences on CLSC is vital (Guide
& Van Wassenhove, 2009).


SSCM has developed interests in business as well as academicians
for the impact it makes to the environment. There are two phases in
sustainable supply chain lifecycle (Govindan, Soleimani, & Kannan,
2015). The first phase is termed as Forward Supply Chain (FSC) and
next phase is termed as Reverse Supply Chain (RSC) or Reverse Logis-
tics (RL). FSC takes cares of the forward business flow where value is
added at each process to meet the customers' requirements. RSC brings
the returned products from the customer and applies 6Rs namely Re-
cover, Reuse, Remanufacture, Recycle, Redesign, Reduce to extend the
product life cycle (Khor & Udin, 2012; Sasikumar & Kannan, 2008a,
2008b).


A typical CLSC model is shown as referred in Fig. 7, which contains


both FSC and RSC. In FSC, supplier supplies raw materials, manu-
facturer produces the finished goods, distributor distributes the pro-
ducts through their distribution channels; retailer sells the product to
consumer. RSC essentially brings the returned products and improves
the sustainability of the end item to protect the global environment
(Chanintrakul, Coronado Mondragon, Lalwani, & Wong, 2009; Kumar &
Rahman, 2014; Qiang, 2015; Savaskan, Bhattacharya, & Van
Wassenhove, 2004; Zheng, Yang, Yang, & Zhang, 2017).


RSC helps to re-process the returned/life ended product by the
following ways:


• Refurbish the product (Guide, Teunter, & Van Wassenhove, 2003)• Make the returned product components as spare parts (Zailani,
Govindan, Shaharudin, & Kuan, 2017)
• Explode the Bill of Material and re-use the components as raw ma-
terial wherever


possible (Amelia, Wahab, Haron, Muhamad, & Azhari, 2009;
Gelbmann & Hammerl, 2015; McKenna, Reith, Cail, Kessler, & Fichtner,
2013; Pappis, Rachaniotis, & Tsoulfas, 2005)


• Resell the unused parts to the supplier who deals with scraps for
recycling (Guide, 2000; Inderfurth, de Kok, & Flapper, 2001; Lin,
2013; Nagalingam, Kuik, & Amer, 2013)


2.4.3. Sensor embedded product and reverse supply chain
One of the high priorities for Supply Chain stakeholders is to deliver


the products on time to customer in good condition. This requires
complete visibility of the product condition across Supply Chain.
Establishing sensor-embedded products can transform Supply Chain
management to next level. In case of RSC, the used product that has
reached end of life can be recovered with various processes such as
reuse, recycle, repair or dispose.


Ilgin and Gupta (2011) discusses the challenges on disassembly of
parts and the uncertainty over missing items in reverse supply chain
and studies the performance measures, which influences sensor-em-
bedded products that can detect missing items prior to disassembly.
Ondemir, Ilgin, and Gupta (2012) developed a model that deals with
the products, which are embedded with sensors. The developed model


Table 4
List of Sustainable Supply Chain (SSC) characteristics from the definitions.
S. No SSC characteristics Source


1 Collaboration focus Seuring and Müller (2008)
2 Environmental focus Badurdeen et al. (2009)
3 Social focus Wittstruck and Teuteberg (2011)
4 Manufacturing focus Wolf (2011)
5 Production system focus Ahi and Searcy (2013)


Fig. 7. Typical CLSC.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna


















determines the process to handle the EOL product in CLSC using sensor-
embedded product. Yang et al. (2018) evaluated the importance of
recovery information for reusable containers recorded by sensors in
closed loop supply chain management. Pal and Kant (2018) discussed
the opportunities that exists with sensor-based infrastructure to monitor
food supply chain which can reduce the food waste and keep the food
fresh till it reaches the end consumer. Bibi, Guillaume, Gontard, and
Sorli (2017) reviewed RFID sensors, which can be used in food supply
chain to track food condition so that spoiled foods can be avoided.


2.4.4. Focus of sustainability in different sectors
The SSCM is a topic of interest for various research studies. It has


been found that SSCM affects performance and growth of the supply
chain industry as they need to meet the government regulations on
environmental policies and compliance (Gotschol, De Giovanni, &
Vinzi, 2014; Wiese, Kellner, Lietke, Toporowski, & Zielke, 2012). Dis-
tribution of the SSC, CLSC literature are listed in Table 5.


The literature review reveals that various organizations are taking
measures towards sustainability. It demonstrates the addition of SSC
into an organization which many institutions take it as pressure
(Bhakoo & Choi, 2013; Hult, Ketchen, & Arrfelt, 2007). Reviews suggest
that the entire supply chain including the partners should start im-
plementing SSC methods (Alblas, Peters, & Wortmann, 2014; Foerstl,
Azadegan, Leppelt, & Hartmann, 2015; Lange, Driessen, Sauer,
Bornemann, & Burger, 2013; Leppelt, Foerstl, Reuter, & Hartmann,
2013; Sarkis, Zhu, & Lai, 2011; Sharma, Iyer, Mehrotra, & Krishnan,
2010; Zhu, Sarkis, & Lai, 2013).


2.5. Influence of ERP on industries


Information and communication technology is significantly chan-
ging the dynamics of business as several companies have already im-
plemented ERP to manage their business efficiently (Min & Zhou, 2002;
Wu & Olson, 2008). ERP system helps an organization to manage their
daily business activities through information systems, which integrates
all the functions and departments so that sharing information across
department is easy and communication happens within the system
(Huang, Chang, Li, & Lin, 2004; Sun, Ni, & Lam, 2015). The role of ERP
in an organization is to effectively manage their business strategy, op-
erations and resources (McAdam & Galloway, 2005; Newell, Tansley, &
Huang, 2004).


The important factor to evaluate an organization is to measure the
optimal utilization of their resources with efficient way of tracking their
business routines (Gürbüz, Alptekin, & Alptekin, 2012; Mexas, Quelhas,
& Costa, 2012; Wei, Wang, & Ju, 2005).


The influence of ERP in various industries are analyzed based on
resource usage, project management, cost and time that considerably
brings the better service possible to the organization (Sedera & Gable,
2010). In this subsection, list of industries, that has an impact on ERP
systems, have been provided as illustrated in Table 6.


This literature review attempted to categorize the industries where
the ERP systems has been deployed successfully. The ERP system in-
fluences the performance of supply chain management (Willcocks &


Sykes, 2000). Successful ERP integration with SCM requires proper
demand forecast, production planning, resource utilization (Li, 2011;
Vandaie, 2008). Instead of managing the individual functions, inter-
connect the operations through ERP systems so that the information is
visible to external stakeholder of supply chain (Palanisamy, 2008). An
example is that the purchasing department places orders as appropriate.
At the supplier end, sales takes up the order and work towards fulfilling
the order. Later the original equipment manufacturer manufacturers
the product; distributes it through distribution channel; then to retailers
and finally it satisfies the customer demand. The entire process can be
managed effectively with help of integrating ERP systems to the SCM
(Acar, Zaim, Isik, & Calisir, 2017). SCN is a collaborative effort from
buying agent, suppliers, vendor managed inventory and more im-
portantly willingness to share the relevant information with the supply
chain partner (Li et al., 2017).


The review revealed that researchers studied the influence of ERP
on SC and other industries but effort on sustainable supply chain with
ERP system has not been made so far. Organizations that have im-
plemented ERP and part of supply chain should uncover the opportu-
nities available from sustainable perspective, which ultimately im-
proves the effectiveness of the organization.


2.6. Study on industry 4.0


Industry 4.0 is a blend of digital technology, which transforms the
industrial production to next level. The fundamental platform for the
success of this technology is the revolution in technologies that consists
of CPS, IoT and IoS. It is flexible and intelligent to interconnect ma-
chines that enables making customized products (Lasi, Fettke, Kemper,
Feld, & Hoffmann, 2014). The Industry 4.0 literature is reviewed to
know the future growth in supply chain industries.


Industry 4.0 will alter the complete production, operations and
maintenance of products and services through interconnected compo-
nents, machines, humans. With the influence of Industry 4.0, the in-
dustrial production systems are expected to perform 30% faster than
earlier and 25% more efficient (Rüßmann, Lorenz, Gerbert, Waldner,
Justus, Engel, & Harnisch, 2015).


The phenomenon of Industry 4.0 was first proposed by Germany to
take strategic initiatives in 2011 (Bauernhansl et al., 2014; Drath &
Horch, 2014; Kagermann, 2015). Initially the perception on Industry
4.0 is twofold. First, it was expected that industrial revolution make a
huge impact on economy. Second, Industry 4.0 promises highly on
operation effectiveness and gives a path to adopt new business models
(Kagermann, 2015). Wan, Cai, and Zhou (2015) researches that Ger-
many is the global leader in manufacturing, automotive, electronics,
sports equipment industry. German Government is investing on in-
dustry 4.0 and promoting this revolution in response to European debt
crisis. Oztemel and Gursev (2018) studied the impact of industry 4.0 in
manufacturing systems, provided a vision to establish a roadmap for
digitalizing the manufacturing setup and explored the ways to trans-
form machine driven manufacturing to digital driven manufacturing.


Table 5
List of publications in SSC and CLSC.
S. No. Focus Explanation Source


1 Food SC The food SC is a primary beneficiary of SSC. The framework focuses on the re-usability of food items inside a
country and scopes out the outside country impacts.


Yakovleva, Sarkis, and Sloan
(2012)


2 Healthcare Focuses on sustainability issues in health care. It discusses on waste management and resource management in
hospital management.


Grose and Richardson (2013)


3 Apparel industry Customer involvement and management strategy are the key factors, which drives the SSC performance. Apparel
industry goes lean and sustainable by leveraging SSC methodologies.


Kozlowski, Searcy, and Bardecki
(2015)


4 Manufacturing Industrial growth induces new opportunities, adhering to new technologies, improves ergonomics from SSC
perspective.


Siemieniuch and Sinclair (2015)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






















2.6.1. Industry 4.0 definitions
The vision of smart factory based on the concept of Industry 4.0


where CPS connects the digital and physical world to make decen-
tralized decisions (Bücker, Hermann, Pentek, & Otto, 2016). The con-
nection of human, parts and systems creates self-guided, dynamic, real-
time value added interconnections across the value chain (Gorecky,
Schmitt, Loskyll, & Zühlke, 2014). Industry 4.0 is a strategic approach,
which uses latest technological innovations in the area of manu-
facturing converging information and communication systems (Schuh,
Potente, Wesch-Potente, Weber, & Prote, 2014).


The literature reveals that Industry 4.0 model is successful because
of the tightly integrated system, which is mainly built based on CPS
(Lee, Bagheri, & Kao, 2015). The collaboration of information platform
and mobile devices with internet-connected technology is a key factor
for success of CPS to realize a smart manufacturing system (Baheti &
Gill, 2011). This leads industry 4.0 to become more digital, self-assis-
tant, information-led (Lee, Kao, & Yang, 2014).


2.6.2. Layers of cyber physical system
CPS is an interconnected system, which is monitored or managed by


information system. In CPS, the digital and physical object are inter-
connected, they interact each other and take decentralized decisions
(Jazdi, 2014; Rajkumar, Lee, Sha, & Stankovic, 2010; Riedl, Zipper,
Meier, & Diedrich, 2014).


CPS requires three layers as illustrated in Fig. 8 (Jing, Vasilakos,
Wan, Lu, & Qiu, 2014).


• connected devices• data stored in cloud in a network infrastructure• Application system or Information System
The physical machines, assets, components are digitally connected


and share the information in real time (Frazzon, Hartmann,
Makuschewitz, & Scholz-Reiter, 2013; Strang & Anderl, 2014). Data is
stored in cloud and transmitted to the networked system. Application
System or Information System is the intelligent system which assists
people virtually and allows users to have real-time interactions between
products, services and connected devices (Sun, Mohan, Sha, & Gunter,
2009).


2.6.3. Evolution of industry 4.0
In the previous industrial revolutions, users have seen the devel-


opments in mechanical, electrical and information technology with


focus on productivity of production system. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the
first industrial revolution is said to be ‘age of steam’ that uses steam
power, which is also termed as hydropower to develop machine tools
and increase the performance of the production system. The second
industrial revolution leverages electricity and makes volume of pro-
duction to optimize the electrical power. The third industrial revolution
stimulates the concept of automation for the routine work by combining
knowledge based systems and electronics. The fourth in this category is
industry 4.0, which accelerates the industrial growth, leverages latest
CPS technology to combine the digital and physical world with in-
formation technology.


Manufacturability or production feasibility is the primary objective
when physical labor involved in production but flexibility in every in-
stance of the production system is the key driver for Industry 4.0
(Brettel, Klein, & Friederichsen, 2016). Smart cities, smart factories,
smart industry are now becoming reality with Industry 4.0 where
physical world and digital systems are interacting with each other
(Wollschlaeger, Sauter, & Jasperneite, 2017).


2.6.4. Design principles of industry 4.0
The design principles assist organization in selecting prospective


industry 4.0 components for their initial development projects and then


Table 6
List of industries impacted by ERP Systems.
S. No. Industry sector Description Source


1 Supply chain SCM modules namely master planning, demand and fulfillment, SC optimizer are tightly packed
and interfaced with conventional ERP functions such as Materials, Procurement, Manufacturing,
Finance, Sales and Human Resources.


Stefanou (1999)


2 Healthcare ERP integration with supply chain triggers ripple effects in a complex environment such as health
care. It requires change in mindset that encourages people to work closely together following new
ways of performing their tasks while sharing common objectives and goals.


Stefanou and Revanoglou (2006)


3 High-tech Quality management on material and service are critical criteria in High Tech Industry, which
tremendously affects an ERP system.


Chien and Tsaur (2007)


4 Semi-conductor related
industry


Analysis suggests that modified service quality gap model assists industrialists to assess the
involvement of ERP in improving service quality for the customers by removing quality issues.


Yeh, Yang, and Lin (2007)


5 Automobile Employed a decision making model to implement ERP systems in automobile industry. The benefits
of the model reduces the risks of decision-making and improves the implementation success rate of
the project.


Hakim and Hakim (2010)


6 Pharmaceutical Examines the role of ERP in pharmaceutical industry and discusses the features of business process
reengineering. The study shows that proper management decision with well-coordinated
information systems is the key for successful ERP implementation.


Bosilj-Vukšić and Spremić (2005)


7 Engineering and
Construction


Introduces a prototype system called SC Collaborator. This system assists supply chain of
construction industries by leveraging web-based technologies. The benefits of the system are more
economical and customizable to integrate supply chain partners, which shares information across
SC partners.


Cheng, Law, Bjornsson, Jones, and
Sriram (2010)


Fig. 8. Interconnected devices form a “digital line” (Cyber Physical Systems).


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






go for full implementation (Waschull, Bokhorst, & Wortmann, 2017).
Industry 4.0 design principles are shown in Fig. 10.


The fundamental principle is to integrate machines, sites with in-
formation systems that can work independently and manage each other
(Thuemmler & Bai, 2017). Organizations can leverage the six design
principles of Industry 4.0 in an effort to make their manufacturing
process digitalized and automated (Gregor, 2002; Hermann, Pentek, &
Otto, 2016). They are discussed as illustrated in Table 7.


Based on literature review, six designs principles were reviewed in
this article; further research is encouraged from an academic or prac-
tical perspective.


2.6.5. Building blocks of industry 4.0
The manufacturing sector is a central focal point for implementing


new technologies (Erol, Jäger, Hold, Ott, & Sihn, 2016). Digital re-in-
vention in industrial revolution is set to redefine every entity in man-
ufacturing value chain. Digital Data, connectivity, automation, mobility
are the digital disruptions happening with industry 4.0 (Cisneros-
Cabrera, Ramzan, Sampaio, & Mehandjiev, 2017). The lists of techno-
logical trends are described in Table 8, which are instrumental in
contributing to industry 4.0 growth.


These innovative technologies in manufacturing results in increased
speed to market, accuracy on the product, customized output as re-
quired by customer and improved overall efficiency (Schweer & Sahl,
2017). The advancements in technology, coupled with connected in-
telligence that amplifies the value of digitalization are the foundation of
Industry 4.0, form the foundation as illustrated in Fig. 11. It is esti-
mated that industry 4.0 will redefine the businesses for the next decade


Fig. 9. Four phases of the industrial revolution.


Fig. 10. Industry 4.0 design principles.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






(Foehr et al., 2017). IoT influenced Industry 4.0 provides greater effi-
ciencies in production with fully integrated, automated, and optimized
process (Vermesan et al., 2013).


2.6.6. Influence of industry 4.0 on various necessities
This emerging technology is not only for manufacturing industries,


it can be applicable for any industry where there are many product
variants produced such as food, beverages, and automotive industries.
In places where there is a need for high quality and precision such as
semi-conductors and pharmaceuticals are also benefited (Kochan &
Miksche, 2017). Organizations need to decide the appropriate infra-
structure to get the new technological advancements in industry 4.0.


Technological advances in industrial revolution dramatically in-
crease the productivity responding to customer needs (Riel & Flatscher,
2017). It lays basis for bringing new innovative business models that
fulfills various necessities of humans. A brief list is provided in Table 9,
that is influenced by industry 4.0.


The above analysis discloses that the adoptions of digital technol-
ogies are growing faster. Organizations need to introduce new in-
novative products with digital capabilities to incur rapid development
and revenue (Bagheri, Yang, Kao, & Lee, 2015). The internet based
smart services on business analytics will expand industry growth (Evans
& Annunziata, 2012). The strength of Industry 4.0 is the ability to
communicate data seamlessly with the new technologies, which creates


value in the entire eco system (Lee, Lapira, Bagheri, & Kao, 2013). Key
trends in Industry 4.0 shows that there is clear transformation in market
dynamics from high-tech to industrial equipment digitally (Basl, 2016).


2.6.7. Prospects of sustainable manufacturing in industry 4.0 – a way
beyond


One of the challenges in growing economy is that there is a higher
demand for industrial system, at the same time organizations should
focus on sustainability of their products (Bocken et al., 2014). The
development in Industry 4.0 gives tremendous opportunities realizing
sustainable manufacturing (Schaltegger & Wagner, 2011). Stock and
Seliger (2016) provided an overview on opportunities available for
sustainable manufacturing in industry 4.0.


With the help of CPS and retrofitting approach, organizations can
extend the equipment life by studying the eco-friendly characteristics of
sustainable product manufacturing. The viable option for SMEs is to re-
use the equipment, as they may not be able to afford huge capital to
procure new manufacturing equipment (Spath, Gerlach, Hämmerle,
Schlund, & Strölin, 2013).


The basics of sustainability in Industry 4.0 suggest that organiza-
tions should realize closed loop life cycles for product. Organizations
should leverage the opportunities to enable ways to re-use and re-
manufacture the products for achieving higher-level throughput
(Duarte & Cruz-Machado, 2017).


Table 7
Industry 4.0 design principles.
Design principle Description Application Source


Virtualization Information systems that creates virtual replica of the physical world information into
digital data.


CPS, Smart Factory MacDougall (2014)


Interoperability Ability of equipment, components to get interconnected and communicate with each
other and humans through internet.


CPS, IoT, IoS, Smart
Factory


Saldivar et al. (2015)


Decentralization Ability of the digitally connected systems to take autonomous decisions and carryout
appropriate actions. Human interaction is only required during exceptions, conflicts with
the anticipated output.


CPS, Smart Factory Gilchrist (2016)


Real-time Capability Ability of the system to communicate the information concurrently for making quick and
better decisions by human resources.


Smart Factory Vogel-Heuser and Hess (2016)


Service orientation Ability of the system to serve organizations and humans as a service using internet which
can used by other stakeholders both internally as well as externally.


Internet of Services Sanders, Subramanian, Redlich, and
Wulfsberg (2017)


Modularity A system, that adheres to dynamic modifications in the requirements by adding or
replacing various modules.


Internet of Services Peres, Rocha, Coelho, and Oliveira
(2017)


Table 8
Technologies that transforms Industrial Production (Industry 4.0).
S. No. Technology Description Source


1 Big data based quality management Algorithms based on historical data detect quality concerns and decrease product
failures.


Rüßmann et al. (2015)


2 Cyber security Cyber security measures takes high priority as it recognizes the new vulnerabilities and
challenges that interlinks industrial management processes and systems digitally.


Flatt, Schriegel, Jasperneite, Trsek,
and Adamczyk (2016)


3 Auto coordinated Production Automatically coordinated machines optimize their utilization and output. Zhang, Zhao, and Qian (2017)
4 Smart supply linkage Monitor the supply network which allows for better supply judgements Radziwon, Bilberg, Bogers, and


Madsen (2014)
5 Self-transported vehicles Fully automated transportation systems used logically within the industry. Kai et al. (2017)
6 Augmented job, maintenance and


repair operations.
Emerging method, which facilitates maintenance guidance, remote support and service. Paelke (2014)


7 Lean modernization Lean automation brings flexibility and eliminates redundant manufacturing effort for a
whole range of machines.


Kolberg and Zühlke (2015)


8 Additive manufacturing Products are created using 3D Printers that reduces product development cost. Huang, Liu, Mokasdar, and Hou
(2013)


9 Manufacturing operations simulation Simulation helps in optimizing the assembly line using optimization applications. Zhou, Liu, and Zhou (2015)
10 Maintenance cloud service Manufacturers offers maintenance services, rather than a product. Build private clouds


to save appropriate manufacturing details and processing.
Yue, Cai, Yan, Zou, and Zhou (2015)


11 Flat and Hierarchical system
integration


Integrate cross-functional departments as well as seamless supply chain co-ordination
among SC partners by automating the process wherever necessary.


Satoglu, Ustundag, Cevikcan, and
Durmusoglu (2018)


12 Robot-aided manufacturing Flexible, intelligent robots performs operations such as assembly and packaging
independently.


Wang, Zhang, and Zhu (2017)


13 IIoT This technology is an essential part within industry 4.0 equipped to interact and
communicate with the Smart Factory and supply chain.


Sadeghi, Wachsmann, and Waidner
(2015)


14 Intuitive predictive maintenance Remote monitoring of equipment permits repair prior to breakdown. Wang (2016)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna










Industry 4.0 uses the technologies IoT, CPS, Cloud Manufacturing
(Trappey, Trappey, Govindarajan, Chuang, & Sun, 2017; Upasani,
Bakshi, Pandhare, & Lad, 2017). A new platform termed as advanced
manufacturing cloud of things along with the application of Automatic
Virtual Metrology achieves the goal of zero defects in wheel machining
automation, which extends a way to the next phase, Industry 4.1 (Lin
et al., 2017).


2.6.8. Next wave of industry 4.0 with SSC
Industry 4.0 can be realized only when organizations are ready to


transform towards digital technology (Liao, Deschamps, Loures, &
Ramos, 2017). With the influence of Industry 4.0, traditional supply
chains has a great potential to transform a highly efficient digital supply
chain by smartly connecting right from product development, pro-
curement, manufacturing, logistics, suppliers, customers and service


(Brettel, Friederichsen, Keller, & Rosenberg, 2014). The entire eco-
system will be benefited if industry 4.0 can go one-step further in ac-
commodating sustainability of digital supply chain (Farahani, Meier, &
Wilke, 2017).


Fig. 12 visualizes the extensive interconnection of components,
machines, systems, processes and various stakeholders of supply chain
to form a digital SCN with future Industry 4.0 (Atanasov, Nikolov,
Pencheva, Dimova, & Ivanov, 2015; Pfohl, Yahsi, & Kurnaz, 2017).
Disruptive business models can offer smart product and services to
serve the customers in a complete digital ecosystem (Kölsch, Herder,
Zimmermann, & Aurich, 2017). The digital cyber network is the focal
point, which shares the information across supply chain mainly dis-
tinguished by taking decentralized actions, from a remote location with
the tightly integrated platform (Ivanov, Dolgui, Sokolov, Werner, &
Ivanova, 2016; Zuehlke, 2010). The reviews reveal that the studies are


Fig. 11. Industry 4.0 Foundation.


Table 9
Influence of Industry 4.0 on various necessities summary list.
S. No. Necessities Description Source


1 Wireless requirements Challenges in key wireless communication evaluated with technology. The three main design
criterions are latency, longevity and the reliability of communication in machine-to-machine
communication


Varghese and Tandur (2014)


2 Manufacturing systems CPS that closely monitors and synchronizes networked machines with machine-to-machine
collaboration and information system.


Theorin et al. (2017)


3 Psychological requirements New activities in occupational psychology and manufacturing science are emerging with
technology.


Dombrowski and Wagner (2014)


4 Small and medium enterprises
(SME)


SMEs explores opportunities with Industry 4.0 to optimize their business process. Faller and Feldmüller (2015)


5 Smart factory Industry, which uses self-controlling machines and autonomous robots controlled by CPS.
With advancement in wireless communication system, these systems are not only intellectual;
it has the adaptive intelligence to take necessary actions based on the pre-defined instructions.


Wang, Wan, Zhang, Li, and Zhang
(2016)


6 Smart products Smart products are able to self-connect and communicate with the help of internet and sensor
in the production process.


Schmidt et al. (2015)


7 Multi-vendor production
systems


With industry 4.0, multi-vendor production line are relatively flexible and self-adaptable
within production systems.


Weyer, Schmitt, Ohmer, and Gorecky
(2015)


8 Industrial wireless networks Wireless networks helps to access data in real time from remote location. Scalability is crucial
to bring the cost down, adoptability and improve the performance. It plays a key factor to
make industry 4.0 commendable and brilliant decision-making system.


Li, Wu, Zong, and Li (2017), Li, Liu, Liu,
Lai, and Xu (2017)


9 Smart manufacturing Smart Manufacturing is the collaboration of internet connected technology which helps the
industry to manufacture goods with less human involvement and self-assisting capability.


Kang et al. (2016)


10 Smart cities The foundation for smart city is IoT and IoS, aimed to provide better quality of living space for
citizens.


Lom, Pribyl, and Svitek (2016)


11 Smart Operators Brings flexibility to human operators and helps to work in dynamic environment with high
capabilities. The solution leverages augmented reality to connect men-machine for the
functional requirements.


Longo, Nicoletti, and Padovano (2017)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna


















happening on industry 4.0 but SCM with sustainability as the key cri-
teria and IoT based SCM systems are not explored much from academic
as well as industry perspective.


2.7. Overview on IoT


The term IoT refers to the robust communication between digital
and physical world (Internet Reports, 2005). From this viewpoint, IoT
brings the convergence of connected products and sensors to offer new
competence. IoT is applied in various industry segments including au-
tomotive, healthcare, manufacturing, home and hi-tech electronics to
make the products, services and operations smarter (Miorandi, Sicari,
De Pellegrini, & Chlamtac, 2012).


Forrester Research has estimated that by 2020, the global IoT rev-
enue will be 30 times those of the internet. The information and com-
munication technology sector will grow by trillion-dollar connecting
25 billion applications everywhere (Pye, 2014). IoT is an emerging
technology, which offers potential solutions to alter the operation and
role of manufacturing, supply chain and logistics industries. The term
IoT was initially used to describe the interoperable connected devices
with RFID technology (Ashton, 2011).


2.7.1. Defining IoT
Various definitions have been proposed for IoT. The essence of the


definitions from author perspective based on the key characteristics
collected from literature has been provided in Table 10.


2.7.1.1. Researcher’s proposed definition. After reviewing various
definitions meticulously, a new definition is proposed. IoT can be
articulated in every surface of human lives across the globe; hence IoT
can be defined as a ‘technology which is intuitive, robust and scalable that
enables digital transformation of the connected world through internet and


communicates all the relevant information in real time across the value
chain’.


IoT has evolved from powerful emergence of wireless technologies,
sensors and internet. IoT connects the networked systems and other
devices through internet. The systems are aware of the environment
and so intuitive with the help of sensors where devices transmits
massive amount of data every day. These connected systems are easy to
use and understand each other with the help of internet.


2.7.2. Rapid evolvement of Internet of Things (IoT)
Influence of IoT is picking up its pace in various organizations


namely aerospace, supply chain, construction and manufacturing sector
(Ji, Ganchev, O'Droma, Zhao, & Zhang, 2014). IoT looks feasible and
scalable considering the advancements in internet application, mobile
communication, adaptive intelligence, machine learning in various
sectors and bring significant influence on enterprise systems (Dong,
Mingyue, & Guoying, 2017).


During 1980, RFID technology was used for warehouse manage-
ment especially to identify the goods and monitor the stocks as illu-
strated in Fig. 13. In 1990s, wireless devices began emerging; as a re-
sult, sensors were used in various fields such as automotive, production,
healthcare. In the 2000s, internet medium was used for standard
communication and later it slowly started providing useful information
by accessing the various systems in enterprise sector. But the challenge
was that the devices still require human interaction. From 2009 on-
wards, the IoT started gaining moment and drastically altered the in-
dustrial and consumer applications. The unique innovation of IoT
technology is sharing the information in real time from a remote lo-
cation. This technology operates dynamically and react to things how a
human will act in such situations.


Fig. 12. Sustainable Supply Chain Network with future ‘Industry 4.0’.


Table 10
List of IoT definitions from author perspective.
S. No. Definition perspective Source


1 Technology Perspective Uckelmann, Harrison, and Michahelles (2011)
2 Interoperable communication perspective Van Kranenburg (2008)
3 Application perspective Yaqoob et al. (2017)
4 Business perspective Sundmaeker, Guillemin, Friess, and Woelfflé (2010)
5 Environment Perspective Shaikh, Zeadally, and Exposito (2017)
6 Analytics Perspective Gubbi, Buyya, Marusic, and Palaniswami (2013)
7 Development perspective Burkett and Steutermann (2014)
8 Process perspective Zhang, Qian, Lv, and Liu (2017)
9 Networking perspective Song et al. (2016)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






2.7.3. Current trends and future impact
Many of the researchers have mentioned that IoT is one of the major


advancements in the digital internet era. Nevertheless, prioritization of
the industries has not been mentioned (Fleisch, Weinberger, &
Wortmann, 2015; Wortmann & Flüchter, 2015). IoT plays an important
role in different industries but to make it more real, academicians and
practitioners need to further analyze and research on IoT (Zheng,
Simplot-Ryl, Bisdikian, & Mouftah, 2011).


As a result, the information coming from the physical systems will
rise drastically as more and more new business opportunities starts
coming in. The information of the digital world is estimated to grow ten
times by 2020 (Shah, 2016).


Yan, Zhang, and Vasilakos (2014) reviewed that trust management
is important in IoT for the data security, user privacy, and cyber se-
curity. The success of this technology depends on consistency and
scalability. IoT provides interoperability, dependability, trustworthi-
ness and effective operations on an international scale (Bandyopadhyay
& Sen, 2011).


2.7.4. IoT applications – stepping up with widespread adoption
Fundamentally, the essence of IoT is to connect physical and digital


objects with the help of internet and information systems (Hwang, Lee,
Park, & Chang, 2017). IoT is emerging into various sector considering
its capability to self-monitor and take right decisions (Khan, Khan,
Zaheer, & Khan, 2012). Irrespective of the application area, IoT brings
sophisticated and flexible industry system, which help organizations
across the globe (Chen, Xu, Liu, Hu, & Wang, 2014). On the basis of
literature, as shown in Fig. 14, application of IoT can be classified into


various sectors such as factory/Industry, vehicle, home, work sites, ci-
ties, offices and human (Borgia, 2014; Wang, Gunasekaran, Ngai, &
Papadopoulos, 2016). Fig. 14 shows that IoT on Human, Factory/In-
dustry and Home applications are the areas mostly studied by re-
searchers.


Each sector is not completely independent as some of the applica-
tions are mutually benefited (Tragos et al., 2014). For example, con-
signment tracking uses the applications related to work sites, factory
and vehicle.


One of the significant development of IoT is the acceptance by wide
spread of many industries and consumers otherwise this technology
may not be accepted by community (Coetzee & Eksteen, 2011).


In this section, various IoT applications were discussed and value
addition it brings to industries and society. Few applications such as
‘Health Monitoring Wearables’, ‘disease management devices’ enabled
by IoT produces rich information and transmits the data of physical
health (Hassanalieragh et al., 2015; Lymberis & Olsson, 2003). Various
appliances at home can be managed efficiently and comfortably using
smart control system, which leverages IoT technology. The smart con-
trol systems such as ‘Home Controllers’ and ‘Security Systems’ monitor
the appliances, home security, and electricity consumption and so on
(Gaikwad, Gabhane, & Golait, 2015; Wang, Zhang, Zhang, Zhang, & Li,
2013). Using IoT devices such as ‘Energy Management Controllers’ and
‘Industrial Security Systems’, energy consumption of office building is
monitored and energy saving methods is suggested (Lee & Lee, 2015;
Wei & Li, 2011).


IoT stimulates the growth of automation where regular and re-
petitive operations can be automated in factories. In addition, industrial


Fig. 13. Evolution of IoT.


Fig. 14. IoT Applications.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






production can reach the next level by utilizing the machines to the
optimum level leveraging IoT. Few examples are smart factory with
optimum workload and capacity schedulers, controller for automating
regular operations (Shrouf & Miragliotta, 2015).


IoT can be deployed in worksites. Using IoT, the potential risks of
shipment delay can be identified. For instance, riders and the stake-
holders are alerted on travel disruptions due to traffic diversions and
road conditions using IoT application. Vehicles can be monitored dy-
namically and alert message can be sent to the maintenance department
based on usage. In addition, vehicle administration system can improve
the road traffic tremendously (Leng & Zhao, 2011). Considering


workers safety, health monitoring system and predictive maintenance
on machines can be implemented in mining industry (Jung, Zhang, &
Winslett, 2017).


Focus on urban IoT system is expected to support sustainable smart
cities. IoT based car parking system, traffic monitoring and control
system, resource management are few applications for making a suc-
cessful smart city (Vlacheas et al., 2013; Zanella, Bui, Castellani,
Vangelista, & Zorzi, 2014).


The investment on IoT from industrial standpoint has increased
significantly. The term IoT has become a key highlight in the industry
as many organizations trying to prioritize their objective of making


Table 11
IoT in various industries.
S. No. Industry Description Source


1 Mining production IoT devices predict the unsafe situations in mine and sends the alert to
stakeholders and workers before an unforeseen situation happens. This enables the
team to act proactively and save lives, cost, time.


Qiuping, Shunbing, and Chunquan (2011); Da
Xu, He, and Li (2014)


2 Logistics The smart products are interconnected with the IoT devices. The logistics
organizations are tracking the physical objects real-time and ensures that the SC
partners are informed with realistic goods availability time.


Zhang et al. (2012)


3 Food SC The dynamics of food industry is time bounded as it deals with perishable items.
The quality of item need to be tracked from farmland until the customer consumer
consuming it. There are several process happens and value is added in every
process. IoT addresses the challenges faced in food processing industry; it tracks,
forecasts the shelf life of the items and estimates the expiry of the item at real time.


Pang, Chen, and Zheng (2012); Doinea, Boja,
Batagan, Toma, and Popa (2015)


4 Healthcare Several IoT devices has come into the market from healthcare perspective. Human
condition is monitored in real time virtually from anywhere. The sophisticated
information system is also helpful during emergency to alert and attend the needy
people with medicine and necessary equipment continuously.


Pang (2013)


5 Emergency response
management


IoT emerges has a boon in emergency response management operations to track
the information and act immediately to take quick decisions where time is the
crucial factor.


Yang, Yang, and Plotnick (2013)


6 Hospital The management of healthcare equipment is an important task of administration
department as it becomes critical sometimes. IoT is a feasible and economical
solution on hospital supply chain management, as it helps in predicting the
equipment maintenance time, automatically informs stakeholders to take
immediate action.


Peng, Su, Chen, and Du (2017)


7 Household From a social standpoint, adoption of IoT and its impact towards the society
especially to households and their occupants were investigated.


Olsson, Bosch, and Katumba (2016), Perera,
Zaslavsky, Christen, and Georgakopoulos (2014)


8 e-retailers For e-retailers, IoT helps in delivering the product timely and efficiently to the
customers. In addition, IoT drives the flexibility and brings healthy relationship
among logistic providers and retailers resulting in on time product deliveries,
which eventually satisfies the customers.


Jie, Subramanian, Ning, and Edwards (2015)


9 Fire fighting IoT devices helps in pre-detecting fire possibilities and sends early warning by
raising automatic alarm to disaster handling team. This technology is proving its
worth during emergency.


Rosas, Aguilar, Tripp-Barba, Espinosa, and
Aguilar (2017)


10 Warehouse management IoT devices enable supervisors to track the location of components from a remote
location. It helps to provide live instructions to workers to handle special
equipment and sensitive materials. Wearable devices increases productivity and
speed shipment. Moreover, it brings accurate visibility into stocks availability in
warehouse and informs warehouse manager automatically.


Reaidy, Gunasekaran, and Spalanzani (2015)


11 Energy management IoT helps organizations to save cost by reducing energy wastes. The intelligence of
IoT is the ability to get the real time data, which will be helpful bringing smart
lighting with sensors. Energy management in smart factories based on the IoT is
the new business model, which is emerging with a focus on the sustainability.


Shrouf, Ordieres, and Miragliotta (2014)


12 Manufacturing and logistics With the advent of IoT, a real-time visibility on machines, component and status
improves product quality. Similarly, IoT provides visibility into physical objects
status, which improves service quality. Overall, SC effectiveness is increased with
the help of IoT.


Papakostas, O'Connor, and Byrne (2016); Chuang
et al. (2016)


13 Industrial Systems Today security and privacy of sensitive data in Industrial IoT systems is critical.
The next generation applications uses cyber physical systems which promises to
explore on security and have strong connectivity of embedded devices.


Tao, Cheng, and Qi (2018)


14 Construction As a sustainable construction technology, prefabrication is a process adopted to
build new houses to mitigate the risk of labor shortage, deliver on time with safety
and environmental protection. Digital technology assists to circumvent the
constraints and build the prefabrication based houses fast.


Li et al. (2016)


15 Product life-cycle energy
management


IoT for product life-cycle energy management is still in early stage. Industries are
trying to employ IoT to reduce energy consumption.


Tao, Wang, Zuo, Yang, and Zhang (2016)


16 Telecommunication Sustainable IoT is prioritized in telecommunication industry to make it more
efficient and scalable.


Zarei, Mohammadian, and Ghasemi (2016)


17 Fashion apparel/footwear With the help of industry 4.0 and IoT embracing ERP into account, a major leap
has happened in fashion apparel and footwear industry to improve the operational
performance.


Majeed and Rupasinghe (2017)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






industry digitalized (Jeschke, Brecher, Meisen, Özdemir, & Eschert,
2017; Kiel, Arnold, & Voigt, 2017). The subsequent section focuses on
IoT on various industries.


2.7.5. Internet of things in industries – expanding the boundaries
IoT provides a potential opportunity to develop robust industrial


systems with the key technologies such as RFID, sensor and wireless
communication. Various industrial IoT applications have been com-
mercialized and started spreading across the globe. In this section, the
literature review on current research of IoT in industries is studied as
described in Table 11.


Based on the analysis, IoT applications are developed for both in-
dustrial and consumer purposes. But the focus on supply chain industry
to improve the end to end value chain has not yet been focused. IoT is
instrumental in improving the overall effectiveness of supply chain by
providing real time data. Further, with adaptive intelligence, stake-
holders are provided with informed decisions.


2.7.6. Emerging new business opportunities with Internet of Things
Global companies are continuously looking for innovative business


opportunities to serve the customers and explores new business models
to make a profitable organization (Yan, 2017). Many opportunities are
offered by IoT, which can be leveraged in several business. Wide range
of applications can use IoT these days such as smart factory, smart cars,
etc. Moreover, it is used in different sectors: healthcare (Wu et al.,
2017), defense (Sha, Xiao, Chen, & Sun, 2017), home appliance (Patel &
Kanawade, 2017), disassembling the operations (Wang, Zhang, Liu, Li,
& Tang, 2017) or logistics (Hofmann & Rüsch, 2017).


Several IoT business model successfully exists today and growing
exponentially in terms of demand versus supply. New business models
are emerging with the influence of IoT where IoT act as a platform and
connect users digitally with the help of wireless and internet (Zhou
et al., 2016).


As illustrated in Fig. 15, in this internet age the business is shifting
from


• Convention library to online books• Businesses started using e-commerce market place to find goods and
services than physical directories
• Fast transformation is happening in communication technology,
users are moving from recorded data from physical gadgets to live
data
• Riders started thinking wisely to share their taxi with others instead
of individual taxi that offers more benefits in terms of cost, time
(Siemens, 2016). It also helps in protecting the environment with
considerable percentage of reduction in carbon footprint (Dijkman,
Sprenkels, Peeters, & Janssen, 2015).


All the above said business models are possible only because of
internet and devices started connecting intelligently and helping the
world a better place to live.


2.7.7. The digital transformation with IoT enablers
There are numerous business opportunities with IoT technology,


that provides the smartness in the devices, products and services. This
section focuses on IoT enablers, which assists businesses or society to
improve on their value chain. The cloud, big data and IoT are in-
divisible technology used to share volume of data in real time without
any performance lag (Gunasekaran, Kumar Tiwari, Dubey, & Fosso
Wamba, 2016). A literature has been studied to review the impact of
key enablers of IoT in various applications. The lists of key enablers of
IoT with its applications are shown in Table 12.


The study reveals that the key enablers of IoT are imperative to
achieve success of the any application such as industrial systems, health
care, etc which uses IoT. Big data connects massive quantity of data that
can be both structured and unstructured. IoT is essentially the means
that collects and sends data so that users takes informed decisions. To
sum it up, Big Data and Cloud are the fuel, and IoT is the brain to realize
the future of a smart connected world.


2.7.8. Role of IoT with various supply chain
IoT is one of today’s most influential technologies which impact the


businesses. The research firm Gartner estimates that the growth of in-
ternet connected physical devices increases exponentially by 2020
which will change the business of how the supply chain operates
(Shrouf & Miragliotta, 2015).


In last decade, businesses were using passive sensors where the data
is static. But with IoT, controlling supply chain dynamically and exe-
cute the decisions on external location is viable. The logistics operations
is a key function of SCM where asset tracking or in-transit components
are complex. IoT helps in monitoring the logistics operation (Qu et al.,
2017).


The review has been done on various supply chain methods in-
cluding GSCM/SSCM practices. Table 13 describes the summary of the
observations made.


The study discloses that IoT influences the future supply chain.
Information, material, finance details are shared across supply chain
partners. The study on SSCM with the influence of IoT technologies is
inadequate now and researchers are encouraged to focus on this area.


2.7.9. IoT based SCM systems
IoT is set to offer efficient and quick solutions required to meet the


supply chain challenges by enabling sensor based technology and share
the information through internet. Some of the key supply chain chal-
lenges are addressed using IoT enabled SCM systems. Tu, Lim, and Yang
(2018) proposed IoT enabled manufacturing transportation system in


Fig. 15. New business models with the influence of IoT.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






Ta
bl
e
12


Ke
y
en
ab
ler
so
fI
oT


wi
th
its


ap
pl
ica
tio
ns
.


S.
No
.


En
ab
ler


Ap
pl
ica
tio
n


De
sc
rip
tio
n


Au
th
or
s


1
Bi
g
da
ta


M
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
Sy
ste
m
s


M
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
gs
ec
to
rp
us
hi
ng


to
ne
xt
tra
ns
fo
rm
at
io
n
‘pr
ed
ict
iv
em


an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g’
wi
th
th
eh
elp


of
Io
T
an
d
CP
S,


to
m
ax
im
ize


pr
od
uc
tiv
ity


an
d
re
du
ce
do
wn
tim


e.
W
an
g,
Tö
rn
gr
en
,a
nd


On
or
i(
20
15
)


2
Cl
ou
d


M
ul
tip
le
(H
ea
lth
ca
re
,L
og
ist
ics
,


Au
to
m
ot
iv
e)


Te
ch
no
lo
gi
es
su
ch


as
Cl
ou
d
an
d
Io
T
bl
en
d
wi
th
in
fo
rm
at
io
n
sy
ste
m
.I
nd
us
try


4.
0
ca
n
be


ap
pl
ied


in
ho
sp
ita
l


he
alt
h
ca
re
m
an
ag
em
en
t,
lo
gi
sti
cs
an
d
au
to
m
ot
iv
ei
nd
us
try
.


Bo
tta
,D
eD


on
at
o,
Pe
rsi
co
,a
nd


Pe
sc
ap
é


(2
01
4)


3
Cl
ou
d


M
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
Sy
ste
m


Th
e
ap
pl
ica
tio
ns
of
th
et
ec
hn
ol
og
ies


Io
T
an
d
CC


in
m
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
sy
ste
m
sp
ro
vi
de
sa
n
in
te
lli
ge
nt
pe
rc
ep
tio
n


an
d
co
nn
ec
tio
n
fro
m
M
2M


fo
rm
sC
lo
ud


M
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
(C
M
fg
).
In
ad
di
tio
n,
it
sh
ar
es
th
eo
n-
de
m
an
d
us
e
an
d


op
tim


al
re
so
ur
ce
sa
llo
ca
tio
n
of
va
rio
us
clo
ud


m
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
ca
pa
bi
lit
ies


so
th
at
CC
Io
T-
CM


fg
fra
m
ew
or
k
is


es
ta
bl
ish
ed
.


Ta
o,
Ch
en
g,
Da


Xu
,Z
ha
ng
,a
nd


Li
(2
01
4)


4
Cl
ou
d
ce
nt
ric


Io
T


Pr
ec
isi
on


Ag
ric
ul
tu
re


Io
T
ca
n
be


us
ed


to
tra
ck
pr
od
uc
tio
n
to
tra
ns
po
rta
tio
n
in
ag
ric
ul
tu
re
in
du
str
y.
St
ak
eh
ol
de
rs
ge
tr
ea
lt
im
e


in
fo
rm
at
io
n
on


th
ec
on
di
tio
no


ft
he
in
ve
nt
or
y.
Cl
ou
d
he
lp
si
n
su
pp
or
tin
gt
he
ag
ric
ul
tu
re
SC


wi
th
th
es
up
po
rt
of


Io
T.


Sa
tp
ut
e
an
d
Te
m
bh
ur
ne


(2
01
4)


5
So
ftw


ar
e-a
s-a
-se
rv
ice


m
od
el


(S
aa
S)


Lo
gi
sti
cS
ys
te
m
s


Io
T
co
m
m
un
ica
te
st
o
Sa
aS
ap
pl
ica
tio
n,
in
tu
rn
Sa
aS
se
nd
sr
ea
lt
im
ea
ler
tm


es
sa
ge
st
o
th
es
ta
ke
ho
ld
er
si
n


lo
gi
sti
ci
nd
us
try


ab
ou
tt
he


sta
tu
so
fs
hi
pp
ed


go
od
s.


Ch
en
,C
he
n,
an
d
Hs
u
(2
01
4)


6
En
te
rp
ris
em


od
eli
ng


M
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g


Em
er
gi
ng


In
te
rn
et
of
Th
in
gs
(Io
T)
su
pp
or
ts
En
te
rp
ris
eS
ys
te
m
in
m
od
er
n
m
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
g
wh
ich


is
ac
tu
all
y
a


co
m
pl
ex
sy
ste
m
co
m
pr
ise
sr
ea
l-t
im
ed


at
a
co
lle
cte
d
fro
m
m
ac
hi
ne
s,
pr
oc
es
se
sa
nd


bu
sin
es
se
nv
iro
nm


en
ts.
Io
T


as
sis
ts
in
dy
na
m
ic
de
cis
io
n-
m
ak
in
g
ac
tiv
iti
es
.


Bi
,D
a
Xu
,a
nd


W
an
g
(2
01
4)


7
Bi
g
da
ta


In
du
str
ial


sy
ste
m
s


Th
e‘
Un
iq
ue


Se
ns
e’
im
pl
em
en
ta
tio
n
m
od
el
fo
rf
ou
rth


in
du
str
ial


re
vo
lu
tio
n
wi
th
bi
g
da
ta
ho
ld
st
he


in
no
va
tiv
e


sm
ar
tc
om


pu
tin
g
fo
cu
se
st
ow
ar
ds
dy
na
m
ic
cu
sto
m
iza
tio
n,
re
us
ab
ili
ty
,e
co
fri
en
dl
in
es
sf
or
ne
xt
ge
ne
ra
tio
n


co
nt
ro
lli
ng


an
d
co
m
pu
ta
tio
n
po
we
r.


Vi
jay
ku
m
ar
,S
ar
av
an
ak
um


ar
,a
nd


Ba
lam


ur
ug
an


(2
01
5)


8
Cl
ou
d


In
du
str
ial


Sy
ste
m
s


In
te
gr
at
io
no
fc
lo
ud


te
ch
no
lo
gi
es
an
di
nd
us
tri
al
cy
be
r-p
hy
sic
al
sy
ste
m
s(
IC
PS
)b
ec
om


es
in
cr
ea
sin
gly


im
po
rta
nt
,


in
m
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
gc
ha
in
an
db


us
in
es
ss
er
vi
ce
s.
IC
PS
wi
ll
pr
om


ot
et
he
m
an
uf
ac
tu
rin
ge
ffi
cie
nc
y,
in
cr
ea
se
qu
ali
ty


of
pr
od
uc
tio
n,
an
d
en
ab
le
a
su
sta
in
ab
le
in
du
str
ial


sy
ste
m
an
d
m
or
ee
nv
iro
nm


en
ta
lly


fri
en
dl
y
bu
sin
es
se
s.


Sa
ni
sla
v,
Ze
ad
all
y,
an
d
M
oi
s(
20
17
)


9
Bi
g
da
ta


Su
sta
in
ab
le
Ec
on
om


y
Co
m
bi
na
tio
n
of
Bi
g
da
ta
an
d
Io
T
im
pr
ov
es
th
eu


sa
ge
of
su
sta
in
ab
le
pr
od
uc
ts
an
d
re
du
ce
sw


as
ta
ge
s.


No
br
ea
nd


Ta
va
re
s(
20
17
)


10
So
ftw


ar
e-d


efi
ne
d
IIo
T


In
du
str
ial


Sy
ste
m
s


IIo
T
an
d
its


en
ab
ler
sp
ro
vi
de
sm


or
efl


ex
ib
ili
ty
to
m
an
ag
ep


hy
sic
al
de
vi
ce
s.


W
an


et
al.


(2
01
6)


11
Bi
g
da
ta


In
du
str
ial


Sy
ste
m
s


Bi
g
da
ta
he
lp
si
n
in
du
str
ial


sy
ste
m
ss
uc
h
as
air
cr
af
ti
nd
us
try


to
ga
in
th
e
in
sig
ht
on


an
aly
tic
sc
on
sid
er
in
g
th
e


hu
ge
am
ou
nt
of
da
ta
ge
ts
ge
ne
ra
te
d.


Vo
ss,


Se
ba
sti
an
,a
nd


Pa
hl
(2
01
7)


12
Cl
ou
d


He
alt
h
ca
re


Io
T
pl
ay
sa


vi
ta
lr
ol
e
in
co
nn
ec
tin
g
m
ed
ica
ld
ev
ice
sa
nd


se
ns
or
si
n
he
alt
hc
ar
ei
nd
us
try
.T
o
cir
cu
m
ve
nt
an
y


ag
gr
av
at
in
g
su
ffe
rin
gs
on


pa
tie
nt
s’
he
alt
h,
it
is
m
an
da
to
ry
to
ha
ve
re
al
tim


e
he
alt
h
ch
ec
k
on


es
se
nt
ial


an
d


cr
uc
ial


ba
sis
.


Ho
ssa
in
an
d
M
uh
am
m
ad


(2
01
6)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






Table 13
Study the influence of IoT with various SCM.
S. No. SCM method Description Source


1 Traditional Analyze the pharmaceutical industry supply chain and the specific application model of internet of things in drugs
supply chain and how to realize drugs information retrieval.


Yan and Huang (2009)


2 Sustainable Establishes alert system with help of IoT in food processing industry to identify the risk and provides recommendation
to protect the food and improve the quality. It also identifies pattern of abnormalities and performs an expert analysis
to increase the sustainability of food manufacturing organization.


Wang and Yue (2017)


3 Agile The emergence of internet helps sharing information with stakeholders to accelerate material flows via SCM execution. Ung and Kun (2010)
4 Lean IoT helps lean SCM of construction enterprises to achieve better operational efficiency. IoT connects the assets,


resources, equipment and helps to achieve on time delivery of work packages, improve on downtime.
Lian-yue (2012)


5 Traditional IoT helps collaborated business eco system in SCM. This article used 6C framework model to examine the patterns of
SCM by leveraging IoT based business eco system.


Rong, Hu, Lin, Shi, and Guo
(2015)


6 CLSC Many companies focuses to retrieve and treat their end-of-use products in order to contribute to the environment. IoT
helps to track, detect, store the returned product process for the optimization of procurement, manufacturing,
recovering and disposal decisions.


Zhong et al. (2017); Wang and
Wang (2017)


7 CLSC An intelligent RSC uses internet as a medium to connect sensors, information systems, RFIDs. This sophisticated RSC
modernizes manufacturing industries to go greener, reduces non-environment friendly resources, saves energy and
ensures optimal utilization of products by recycling the scraps.


Parry, Brax, Maull, and Ng
(2016)


8 Green IoT system in GSC enhances decision-making in green inventory management. Chen (2015)
9 Traditional Innovation has become key element in SCM to gain the competitive advantage. IoT based SCM system helps to achieve


that advantage.
Li and Li (2017)


Fig. 16. Factory of Future in Sustainable Supply Chain Eco System with Industry 4.0.


Fig. 17. Framework for assessing SSCM for Industry 4.0.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






Table 14
Framework for assessing SSCM for fourth industrial revolution.
Enabler Criteria Attribute Source


Business based smart operations
Perspective


Services Management • Streamline and monitor execution of
service• Track services performance• Achieve complete view of services spend
to know it is in compliance


Kathawala and Abdou (2003); Youngdahl and Loomba (2000);
Balsmeier and Voisin (1996).


Operational
Management


• Automate routine work/transactions• Align operations to business needs• Respond to exceptions before business is
affected• Manage Spend and reduce waste


Corbett and Kleindorfer (2003); Kleindorfer, Singhal, and
Wassenhove (2005); Kocabasoglu, Prahinski, and Klassen (2007).


Strategic Sourcing • Maximize realized savings• Get right suppliers and right materials• Structure negotiations for quality
outcomes• Enforce appropriate contract verbiage


Anderson and Katz (1998); Croom, Romano, and Giannakis (2000);
D’Amico, Mogre, Clarke, Lindgreen, and Hingley (2017).


Supplier
Management


• Simplify and automate supplier audits• Analyze supplier performance• Orchestrate supplier evaluation by various
departments


Saeed, Malhotra, and Grover (2005; Jayaram, Xu, and Nicolae
(2011); Prajogo, Chowdhury, Yeung, and Cheng (2012); Ataseven
and Nair (2017)


Technology based smart products
Perspective


IoT • Monitor entire supply chain network• Introduce Cyber Security• Sense the environmental risks upfront• Manage resource and systems
Tu, Chung, Chiu, Chung, and Tzeng (2017); Nagurney, Daniele, and
Shukla (2017); Rodger and George (2017); Kache and Seuring
(2017).


CPS • Assess the real-time information sharing• Self-monitor and control the process• Predict actions or needs of users• Self-organizing production
Monostori (2014); Monostori et al. (2016); Barthelmey, Störkle,
Kuhlenkötter, and Deuse (2014)


Augment Reality • Emergency management• Remote assistance and guidance in
maintenance activities• New ways of coordination of design and
manufacturing process


Mourtzis, Doukas, and Bernidaki (2014); Ong, Yuan, and Nee
(2008); Salonitis and Stavropoulos (2013)


Big Data • Proactive risk alerts based on historical
data• Deplete quality issues and product failure• Flexible in consolidating data for business
intelligence• Predictive Analytics and Forecasting Tools


Hazen, Boone, Ezell, and Jones-Farmer (2014); Wang, Chaudhry,
and Li (2016), Wang, Wan, Li, and Zhang (2016); Gunasekaran et al.
(2017)


Sustainable Development
Perspective


Economic • Financial Stability• Study risk exposure across organization• Investment on technological
improvements• Retrofitting approach to extend the
equipment life before considering new
equipment


Anderson (2007); Fahimnia, Sarkis, Gunasekaran, and Farahani
(2017); Genovese, Acquaye, Figueroa, and Koh (2017); Sauer and
Seuring (2017); Zeng, Chen, Xiao, and Zhou (2017);


Environment • Reduce nonrenewable energy resource• Global warming with air pollution• Release of water and soil pollutants
Coyle, Thomchick, and Ruamsook (2015); Dam and Petkova (2014);
Zhu, Geng, and Lai (2011)


Social • Enforce health and safety practices• Adhere to government regulations• Awareness on macro-economics
Krause, Vachon, and Klassen (2009); Mani, Gunasekaran,
Papadopoulos, Hazen, and Dubey (2016); Kogg and Mont (2012)


Collaboration Perspective Joint Development • Collaborate across lines of business• Usage of product data management (PDM)
systems• Reduction of non-value added costs


Jafari, Hejazi, and Rasti-Barzoki (2017); Irani, Kamal, Sharif, and
Love (2017); Thomson et al. (2017); Niesten, Jolink, de Sousa
Jabbour, Chappin, and Lozano (2017)


Logistics Integration • Visibility on in-transit consignment
Location, status and allocations• Remove obstacles impacting delivery or
cost variation• Leverage technology & enable information
driven decision-making.


Farkavcova, Rieckhof, and Guenther (2018); Qaiser, Ahmed, Sykora,
Choudhary, and Simpson (2017); Boenzi, Digiesi, Facchini, Mossa,
and Mummolo (2017); Sayyadi and Awasthi (2017).


Supplier
Collaboration


• Improve the cost performance index by
ensuring right material• Establish collaboration with suppliers
using online systems• Bring the visibility to Strategic Initiatives• Leverage long term supplier relationship


Chen et al. (2017); Squire, Cousins, Lawson, and Brown (2009);
Canzaniello, Hartmann, and Fifka (2017)


Customer response
adoption


• Customer Satisfaction – Cost, Quality,
Timeliness• User experience – universal adoption,
maximize savings• Reduce go-to-market time by automating
processes


Kuo et al. (2017); Lim, Tseng, Tan, and Bui (2017); de Camargo
Fiorini and Jabbour (2017); Yawar and Seuring (2017)


Cost Management
(continued on next page)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna






supply chain. The proposed system can track finished good and various
items of the finished goods along the supply chain. Leng, Jin, Shi, and
Van Nieuwenhuyse (2018) studied on the agriculture logistics and
supply chain based on RFID based technology. It further explored the
application of RFID in the manufacturing process of agricultural pro-
ducts and testing the efficiency of the system. Rezaei, Akbarpour
Shirazi, and Karimi (2017) suggested a model for supply chain perfor-
mance using IoT, which allows the stakeholders to take dynamic deci-
sion based on real-time information. Li et al. (2017) suggested a live
monitoring system for food SC based on IoT and shares the information
with stakeholders, which improves the food quality of prepackaged
food.


3. Opportunities on IoT embedded SSC in industry 4.0 era


IoT influences in supply chain is still at the initial stage where the
study suggests that supply chain industry should step up to extract the
benefits of next generation technologies. The study also uncovers the
opportunities available with IoT, Big data for Sustainable Supply chain.
Any typical supply chain organization needs to invest on such tech-
nologies to reap the benefits in long run.


Further, sustainable supply chain practices encourages the usage of
sustainable energy. As illustrated in Fig. 16, the vision of Industry 4.0 in
SSC is that the entire business should be connected digitally; reduce the
carbon footprint and help the stakeholders to take dynamic decisions on
real time. IoT enables interconnecting the machines, components, de-
vices and users within an enterprise. Further, it is not only to connect
with one manufacturing site, by leveraging cloud and internet it should
be possible connecting multiple sites forming many digital supply chain
lines (Hazen, Skipper, Ezell, & Boone, 2016).


The literature study suggests that the sustainability on supply chain
leveraging IoT with Industry 4.0 was not focused earlier and thus it is
considered as a gap. Based on the literature, a new framework for as-
sessing sustainability in supply chain management for industry 4.0 is
proposed as illustrated in Fig. 17. The conceptual model has been for-
mulated from five perspectives of SSCM namely business, technology,
sustainable development, collaboration, management strategy to meet
the requirements of the fourth industrial revolution.


The framework has three layers as tabulated in Table 14. First layer
contains five enablers, which influences the sustainability; second layer
comprises of 18 sustainability criteria; third layer comprises of 62 at-
tributes. This framework is a complete model for assessing sustain-
ability in SC organization from Industry 4.0 perspective.


4. Managerial implications


The implications as a result of this analysis to assess the SSCM in


industry 4.0 is explained in this section. This article analyses the var-
ious aspects of SCM, ERP, IoT and Industry 4.0. It discusses the im-
portance of digitalization and the influence of IoT in the overall SCM.
With IoT, stakeholders are equipped with technology to manage their
resources efficiently and remotely. The reviews revealed that IoT ap-
plications on Human, Industry/Factory, home are the areas mostly
studied by researchers. Organizations are also motivated to make en-
vironment-friendly products by using renewable raw materials, estab-
lish close loop supply chain and recover the end-of-life products to
reduce the carbon footprints and increase their economic performance.
This initiative will enrich their sustainability goal of the organization.


The research also shows that few industries have started investing
on technology to improve their overall operational efficiency thereby
increase the margins. From the review, it reveals that the organizations
can be integrated in real-time with the stakeholders such as suppliers,
manufacturers, retailers, and customers in Industry 4.0 environment.
This benefits the entire supply chain with shared information in busi-
ness processes, building innovative solutions and the emergence of new
business opportunities. This study explores the criteria that can be as-
sessed by companies to realize the readiness for industry 4.0 transfor-
mation.


5. Conclusion


Organizations are gradually moving towards implementing digital
technology, IoT for enhancing the outcomes. It guarantees wide pro-
spects to gain competitive advantage and set the tone for the future
sustainable supply chain practices. Industry 4.0 offers quick response to
customer demand. It improves the productivity and allows the stake-
holders to make quicker decision in real time. It certainly pave ways to
adopt new business models, improve manufacturing process.


In this review, the various aspects of IoT, SSC, and Industry 4.0 have
been investigated in detail. The literatures were analyzed to know the
trends and explored the potential of IoT opportunities available in
sustainable supply chain space for industry 4.0. Based on the in-
vestigation, a new framework for assessing the preparedness of SCM for
a sustainable growth to meet industry 4.0 is proposed. The conceptual
model has been formulated from five perspectives of SCM namely
business, technology, sustainable development, collaboration, man-
agement strategy perspectives. The framework provided can be the
foundation to transform into industry 4.0 organization. At the com-
pletion of this transformation, organizations will become complete di-
gital enterprise. The digital enterprise will operate with supply chain
partners in organizational digital ecosystems.


The analysis shows that there are good opportunities available to
perform further research in sustainable supply chain as it is still in in-
fancy stage for industry 4.0 requirements. In order to improve


Table 14 (continued)


Enabler Criteria Attribute Source


Management Strategy and
Organization Perspective


• Improve cash flow predictability and
visibility throughout the supply chain• Monitor price-movements of components
that impact profitability• Adapt to changing spending patterns• Manage, process, the remarket products
and services


Um, Lyons, Lam, Cheng, and Dominguez-Pery (2017); Keramydas,
Mallidis, Dekker, Vlachos, and Iakovou (2017); Wu, Wu, Redouté,
and Yuce (2017); Scholten and Fynes (2017)


Time Management • Automate Expensive Data Management• Ensure compliance for procuring timely
services• Mobile based communication systems


Tarafdar and Qrunfleh (2017); Blome, Schoenherr, and Rexhausen
(2013); Braunscheidel and Suresh (2009); Pagell and Wu (2017)


Value driven
investment


• Generate demand for goods and services• Manage supply base across multiple
product categories• Anticipate risks and provide mitigation
plans


Liao, Hu, and Ding (2017); Busse, Schleper, Weilenmann, and
Wagner (2017); Christopher and Holweg (2017); He (2017)


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna


































operational effectiveness, academicians and practitioners are en-
couraged to investigate on leveraging latest digital offerings such as
IoT, Industry 4.0 in SSCM.


5.1. Limitations and future research direction


The study on literature suggests that it is inevitable to invest on
technology to yield the benefits of industry 4.0. In addition, trans-
forming to industry 4.0 requires proper IT security solutions, workforce
with required skill sets, sharing information in integrated environment
with business partners. Small-scale industries may find it difficult to
implement industry 4.0 as they lack sufficient financial resources to
make investments. Thus, it will be challenge for small-scale industries
to implement industry 4.0. The proposed framework for assessing SSCM
is generic for all organizations. In future, there can be few more addi-
tions to the criteria in the framework for industry specific deployment
of Industry 4.0.


References


Acar, M. F., Zaim, S., Isik, M., & Calisir, F. (2017). Relationships among ERP, supply chain
orientation and operational performance: An analysis of structural equation mod-
eling. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 24(5), 1291–1308.


Accorsi, R., Bortolini, M., Baruffaldi, G., Pilati, F., & Ferrari, E. (2017). Internet-of-things
paradigm in food supply chains control and management. Procedia Manufacturing, 11,
889–895.


Addo-Tenkorang, R., & Helo, P. T. (2016). Big data applications in operations/supply-
chain management: A literature review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 101,
528–543.


Agus, A., & Ahmad, S. (2017). The significant impact of customer relations practices
(CRP), information technology (IT) and information sharing between supply chain
partners (IS) on product sales. Gading Journal for the Social Sciences, 12(01), 65–85.


Ahi, P., & Searcy, C. (2013). A comparative literature analysis of definitions for green and
sustainable supply chain management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 52, 329–341.


Akkermans, H., Bogerd, P., & Vos, B. (1999). Virtuous and vicious cycles on the road
towards international supply chain management. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, 19(5/6), 565–582.


Alblas, A. A., Peters, K., & Wortmann, J. C. (2014). Fuzzy sustainability incentives in new
product development: An empirical exploration of sustainability challenges in man-
ufacturing companies. International Journal of Operations & Production Management,
34(4), 513–545.


Amelia, L., Wahab, D. A., Haron, C. C., Muhamad, N., & Azhari, C. H. (2009). Initiating
automotive component reuse in Malaysia. Journal of Cleaner Production, 17(17),
1572–1579.


Anderson, M. S. (2007). An introductory note on the environmental economics of the
circular economy. Sustainability Science, 2, 133–140.


Anderson, M. G., & Katz, P. B. (1998). Strategic sourcing. The International Journal of
Logistics Management, 9(1), 1–13.


Angeles, R. (2005). RFID technologies: Supply-chain applications and implementation
issues. Information Systems Management, 22(1), 51–65.


Ângelo, A., Barata, J., da Cunha, P. R., & Almeida, V. (2017). Digital transformation in the
pharmaceutical compounds supply chain: Design of a service ecosystem with e-la-
beling. European, Mediterranean, and Middle Eastern conference on information systems
(pp. 307–323). Cham: Springer.


Arif-Uz-Zaman, K., & Nazmul Ahsan, A. M. M. (2014). Lean supply chain performance
measurement. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management,
63(5), 588–612.


Arrieta, A., Sagardui, G., & Etxeberria, L. (2014). A model-based testing methodology for
the systematic validation of highly configurable cyber-physical systems. The sixth
international conference on advances in system testing and validation lifecycle (pp. 66–
72). .


Ashby, A., Leat, M., & Hudson-Smith, M. (2012). Making connections: A review of supply
chain management and sustainability literature. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 17(5), 497–516.


Ashton, K. (2011). That ‘internet of things’ thing. RFiD Journal, 22(7).
Asrawi, I., Saleh, Y., & Othman, M. (2017). Integrating drivers’ differences in optimizing


green supply chain management at tactical and operational levels. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 112, 122–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.08.018.


Atanasov, I., Nikolov, A., Pencheva, E., Dimova, R., & Ivanov, M. (2015). An approach to
data annotation for internet of things. International Journal of Information Technology
and Web Engineering (IJITWE), 10(4), 1–19.


Ataseven, C., & Nair, A. (2017). Assessment of supply chain integration and performance
relationships: A meta-analytic investigation of the literature. International Journal of
Production Economics, 185, 252–265.


Atasu, A., Guide, V. D. R., & Wassenhove, L. N. (2008). Product reuse economics in
closed-loop supply chain research. Production and Operations Management, 17(5),
483–496.


Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The internet of things: A survey. Computer
Networks, 54(15), 2787–2805.


Badurdeen, F., Iyengar, D., Goldsby, T. J., Metta, H., Gupta, S., & Jawahir, I. S. (2009).


Extending total life-cycle thinking to sustainable supply chain design. International
Journal of Product Lifecycle Management, 4(1–3), 49–67.


Bagchi, P. K., Chun Ha, B., Skjoett-Larsen, T., & Boege Soerensen, L. (2005). Supply chain
integration: A European survey. The International Journal of Logistics Management,
16(2), 275–294.


Bagheri, B., Yang, S., Kao, H. A., & Lee, J. (2015). Cyber-physical systems architecture for
self-aware machines in industry 4.0 environment. IFAC-Papers OnLine, 48(3),
1622–1627.


Baheti, R., & Gill, H. (2011). Cyber-physical systems. The Impact of Control Technology, 12,
161–166.


Bai, C., & Sarkis, J. (2010). Green supplier development: Analytical evaluation using
rough set theory. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(12), 1200–1210.


Balsmeier, P., & Voisin, W. J. (1996). Supply chain management: A time-based strategy.
Industrial Management-Chicago Then Atlanta, 38, 24–27.


Banchuen, P., Sadler, I., & Shee, H. (2017). Supply chain collaboration aligns order-
winning strategy with business outcomes. IIMB Management Review, 29(2), 109–121.


Bandyopadhyay, D., & Sen, J. (2011). Internet of things: Applications and challenges in
technology and standardization. Wireless Personal Communications, 58(1), 49–69.


Barratt, M. (2004). Understanding the meaning of collaboration in the supply chain.
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 9(1), 30–42.


Barthelmey, A., Störkle, D., Kuhlenkötter, B., & Deuse, J. (2014). Cyber physical systems
for life cycle continuous technical documentation of manufacturing facilities.
Procedia CIRP, 17, 207–211.


Barut, M., Faisst, W., & Kanet, J. J. (2002). Measuring supply chain coupling: An in-
formation system perspective. European Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management,
8(3), 161–171.


Basl, J. (2016). Enterprise information systems and technologies in czech companies from
the perspective of trends in industry 4.0. Research and practical issues of enterprise
information systems: 10th IFIP WG 8.9 working conference, CONFENIS 2016, Vienna,
Austria, December 13–14, 2016, proceedings 10 (pp. 156–165). Springer International
Publishing.


Battini, D., Bogataj, M., & Choudhary, A. (2017). Closed loop supply chain (CLSC):
Economics, modelling, management and control (pp. 319–321).


Bauernhansl, T., Ten Hompel, M., & Vogel-Heuser, B. (Eds.). (2014). Industrie 4.0 in
Produktion, Automatisierung und Logistik: Anwendung, Technologien und Migration (pp.
1–648). Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg.


Bechtel, C., & Jayaram, J. (1997). Supply chain management: A strategic perspective. The
International Journal of Logistics Management, 8(1), 15–34.


Bhakoo, V., & Choi, T. (2013). The iron cage exposed: Institutional pressures and het-
erogeneity across the healthcare supply chain. Journal of Operations Management,
31(6), 432–449.


Bi, Z., Da Xu, L., & Wang, C. (2014). Internet of things for enterprise systems of modern
manufacturing. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 10(2), 1537–1546.


Bibi, F., Guillaume, C., Gontard, N., & Sorli, B. (2017). A review: RFID technology having
sensing aptitudes for food industry and their contribution to tracking and monitoring
of food products. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 62, 91–103.


Bienhaus, F., & Haddud, A. (2018). Procurement 4.0: Factors influencing the digitisation
of procurement and supply chains. Business Process Management Journal.


Blome, C., Schoenherr, T., & Rexhausen, D. (2013). Antecedents and enablers of supply
chain agility and its effect on performance: A dynamic capabilities perspective.
International Journal of Production Research, 51(4), 1295–1318.


Bocken, N. M. P., Short, S. W., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2014). A literature and practice
review to develop sustainable business model archetypes. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 65, 42–56.


Boenzi, F., Digiesi, S., Facchini, F., Mossa, G., & Mummolo, G. (2017). A nonlinear integer
programming model for warehousing sustainable logistics. Engineering systems and
networks (pp. 99–107). Cham: Springer.


Borgia, E. (2014). The internet of things vision: Key features, applications and open is-
sues. Computer Communications, 54, 1–31.


Bosilj-Vukšić, V., & Spremić, M. (2005). ERP system implementation and business process
change: Case study of a pharmaceutical company. CIT. Journal of Computing and
Information Technology, 13(1), 11–24.


Botta, A., De Donato, W., Persico, V., & Pescapé, A. (2014). On the integration of cloud
computing and internet of things. Future internet of things and cloud (FiCloud), 2014
international conference on (pp. 23–30). IEEE.


Brandenburg, M., Govindan, K., Sarkis, J., & Seuring, S. (2014). Quantitative models for
sustainable supply chain management: Developments and directions. European
Journal of Operational Research, 233(2), 299–312.


Brandenburg, M., & Rebs, T. (2015). Sustainable supply chain management: A modeling
perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 229(1), 213–252.


Braunscheidel, M. J., & Suresh, N. C. (2009). The organizational antecedents of a firm’s
supply chain agility for risk mitigation and response. Journal of Operations
Management, 27(2), 119–140.


Brettel, M., Friederichsen, N., Keller, M., & Rosenberg, M. (2014). How virtualization,
decentralization and network building change the manufacturing landscape: An in-
dustry 4.0 perspective. International Journal of Mechanical, Industrial Science and
Engineering, 8(1), 37–44.


Brettel, M., Klein, M., & Friederichsen, N. (2016). The relevance of manufacturing flex-
ibility in the context of industrie 4.0. Procedia CIRP, 41, 105–110.


Bücker, I., Hermann, M., Pentek, T., & Otto, B. (2016). Towards a methodology for
Industrie 4.0 transformation. International conference on business information systems
(pp. 209–221). Springer International Publishing.


Burkett, M., & Steutermann, S. (2014). How digital business disrupts the supply chain.
Wall Street Journal, 9.


Busse, C., Schleper, M. C., Weilenmann, J., & Wagner, S. M. (2017). Extending the supply
chain visibility boundary: Utilizing stakeholders for identifying supply chain


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0080

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.08.018

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0270




sustainability risks. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management, 47(1), 18–40.


Camilleri, M. A. (2017). Responsible supply chain management and stakeholder en-
gagement for corporate reputation. Corporate sustainability, social responsibility and
environmental management (pp. 79–95). Springer International Publishing.


Canzaniello, A., Hartmann, E., & Fifka, M. S. (2017). Intra-industry strategic alliances for
managing sustainability-related supplier risks: Motivation and outcome. International
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 47(5), 387–409.


Cao, M., & Zhang, Q. (2011). Supply chain collaboration: Impact on collaborative ad-
vantage and firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 29(3), 163–180.


Carter, C. R., & Jennings, M. M. (2004). The role of purchasing in corporate social re-
sponsibility: A structural equation analysis. Journal of Business Logistics, 25(1),
145–186.


Chanintrakul, P., Coronado Mondragon, A. E., Lalwani, C., & Wong, C. Y. (2009). Reverse
logistics network design: A state-of-the-art literature review. International Journal of
Business Performance and Supply Chain Modelling, 1(1), 61–81.


Chen, R. Y. (2015). Intelligent IoT-enabled system in green supply chain using integrated
FCM method. International Journal of Business Analytics (IJBAN), 2(3), 47–66.


Chen, S. L., Chen, Y. Y., & Hsu, C. (2014). A new approach to integrate internet-of-things
and software-as-a-service model for logistic systems: A case study. Sensors, 14(4),
6144–6164.


Chen, T. K., Liao, H. H., & Huang, H. C. (2014). Macroeconomic risks of supply chain
counterparties and corporate bond yield spreads. Review of Quantitative Finance and
Accounting, 43(3), 463–481.


Chen, I. J., & Paulraj, A. (2004). Understanding supply chain management: Critical re-
search and a theoretical framework. International Journal of Production Research,
42(1), 131–163.


Chen, I. J., Paulraj, A., & Lado, A. A. (2004). Strategic purchasing, supply management,
and firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 22(5), 505–523.


Chen, S., Xu, H., Liu, D., Hu, B., & Wang, H. (2014). A vision of IoT: Applications,
challenges, and opportunities with China perspective. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
1(4), 349–359.


Chen, L., Zhao, X., Tang, O., Price, L., Zhang, S., & Zhu, W. (2017). Supply chain colla-
boration for sustainability: A literature review and future research agenda.
International Journal of Production Economics, 73–87.


Cheng, J. C., Law, K. H., Bjornsson, H., Jones, A., & Sriram, R. (2010). A service oriented
framework for construction supply chain integration. Automation in Construction,
19(2), 245–260.


Chien, S. W., & Tsaur, S. M. (2007). Investigating the success of ERP systems: Case studies
in three Taiwanese high-tech industries. Computers in Industry, 58(8), 783–793.


Chithambaranathan, P., Subramanian, N., Gunasekaran, A., & Palaniappan, P. K. (2015).
Service supply chain environmental performance evaluation using grey based hybrid
MCDM approach. International Journal of Production Economics, 166, 163–176.


Christopher, M., & Holweg, M. (2017). Supply chain 2.0 revisited: A framework for
managing volatility-induced risk in the supply chain. International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, 47(1), 2–17.


Chuang, C. H., Lee, D. H., Chang, W. J., Weng, W. C., Shaikh, M. O., & Huang, C. L.
(2016). Real-time monitoring via patch-type piezoelectric force sensors for Internet of
Things based logistics. IEEE Sensors Journal, 17(8), 2498–2506.


Cisneros-Cabrera, S., Ramzan, A., Sampaio, P., & Mehandjiev, N. (2017). Digital mar-
ketplaces for industry 4.0: A survey and gap analysis. Working conference on virtual
enterprises (pp. 18–27). Cham: Springer.


Coetzee, L., & Eksteen, J. (2011). The internet of things-promise for the future? An in-
troduction. IST-Africa conference proceedings, 2011 (pp. 1–9). IEEE.


Corbett, C. J., & Kleindorfer, P. R. (2003). Environmental management and operations
management: Introduction to the third special issue. Production and Operations
Management, 12(3), 287–289.


Coyle, J. J., Thomchick, E. A., & Ruamsook, K. (2015). Environmentally sustainable
supply chain management: An evolutionary framework. Marketing dynamism & sus-
tainability: Things change, things stay the same… (pp. 365–374). Cham: Springer.


Croom, S., Romano, P., & Giannakis, M. (2000). Supply chain management: An analytical
framework for critical literature review. European Journal of Purchasing & Supply
Management, 6(1), 67–83.


Czajkiewicz, Z. (2008). Direct digital manufacturing-new product development and
production technology. Economics and Organization of Enterprise, 2(2), 29–37.


D’Amico, F., Mogre, R., Clarke, S., Lindgreen, A., & Hingley, M. (2017). How purchasing
and supply management practices affect key success factors: The case of the offshore-
wind supply chain. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 32(2), 218–226.


Da Xu, L., He, W., & Li, S. (2014). Internet of things in industries: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 10(4), 2233–2243.


Dam, L., & Petkova, B. N. (2014). The impact of environmental supply chain sustain-
ability programs on shareholder wealth. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, 34(5), 586–609.


de Camargo Fiorini, P., & Jabbour, C. J. C. (2017). Information systems and sustainable
supply chain management towards a more sustainable society: Where we are and
where we are going. International Journal of Information Management, 37(4), 241–249.


Diabat, A., & Govindan, K. (2011). An analysis of the drivers affecting the implementation
of green supply chain management. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 55(6),
659–667.


Dijkman, R. M., Sprenkels, B., Peeters, T., & Janssen, A. (2015). Business models for the
Internet of Things. International Journal of Information Management, 35(6), 672–678.


Doinea, M., Boja, C., Batagan, L., Toma, C., & Popa, M. (2015). Internet of things based
systems for food safety management. Informatica Economica, 19(1), 87.


Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., Sethi, S. P., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Scheduling in production, supply
chain and Industry 4.0 systems by optimal control: Fundamentals, state-of-the-art and
applications. International Journal of Production Research, 1–22.


Dombrowski, U., & Wagner, T. (2014). Mental strain as field of action in the 4th industrial
revolution. Procedia CIRP, 17, 100–105.


Dong, L., Mingyue, R., & Guoying, M. (2017). Application of internet of things technology
on predictive maintenance system of coal equipment. Procedia Engineering, 174,
885–889.


Drath, R., & Horch, A. (2014). Industrie 4.0: Hit or hype? [industry forum]. IEEE Industrial
Electronics Magazine, 8(2), 56–58.


Duarte, S., & Cruz-Machado, V. (2017). Exploring linkages between lean and green supply
chain and the industry 4.0. International conference on management science and en-
gineering management, July (pp. 1242–1252). Cham: Springer.


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., & Childe, S. J. (2015). Green supply chain
management enablers: Mixed methods research. Sustainable Production and
Consumption, 4, 72–88.


Dutta, D. K., & Hora, M. (2017). From invention success to commercialization success:
Technology ventures and the benefits of upstream and downstream supply-chain
alliances. Journal of Small Business Management, 55(2), 216–235.


Entezaminia, A., Heidari, M., & Rahmani, D. (2017). Robust aggregate production plan-
ning in a green supply chain under uncertainty considering reverse logistics: A case
study. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 90(5–8),
1507–1528.


Erol, S., Jäger, A., Hold, P., Ott, K., & Sihn, W. (2016). Tangible Industry 4.0: A scenario-
based approach to learning for the future of production. Procedia CIRP, 54, 13–18.


Esfahbodi, A., Zhang, Y., & Watson, G. (2016). Sustainable supply chain management in
emerging economies: Trade-offs between environmental and cost performance.
International Journal of Production Economics, 181, 350–366.


Evans, P. C., & Annunziata, M. (2012). Industrial internet. Pushing the Boundaries of Minds
and Machines, 26.


Fahimnia, B., Sarkis, J., Gunasekaran, A., & Farahani, R. (2017). Decision models for
sustainable supply chain design and management. Annals of Operations Research,
250(2), 277–278.


Fallahpour, A., Olugu, E. U., Musa, S. N., Wong, K. Y., & Noori, S. (2017). A decision
support model for sustainable supplier selection in sustainable supply chain man-
agement. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 105, 391–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cie.2017.01.005.


Faller, C., & Feldmüller, D. (2015). Industry 4.0 learning factory for regional SMEs.
Procedia CIRP, 32, 88–91.


Farahani, P., Meier, C., & Wilke, J. (2017). Digital supply chain management agenda for
the automotive supplier industry. Shaping the digital enterprise (pp. 157–172). Springer
International Publishing.


Farkavcova, V. G., Rieckhof, R., & Guenther, E. (2018). Expanding knowledge on en-
vironmental impacts of transport processes for more sustainable supply chain deci-
sions: A case study using life cycle assessment. Transportation Research Part D:
Transport and Environment, 61, 68–83.


Fawcett, S. E., Ellram, L. M., & Ogden, J. A. (2013). Supply chain management: Pearson new
international edition: From vision to implementation. Pearson Higher Ed.


Fawcett, S. E., Fawcett, A. M., Watson, B. J., & Magnan, G. M. (2012). Peeking inside the
black box: Toward an understanding of supply chain collaboration dynamics. Journal
of Supply Chain Management, 48(1), 44–72.


Flatt, H., Schriegel, S., Jasperneite, J., Trsek, H., & Adamczyk, H. (2016). Analysis of the
cyber-security of Industry 4.0 technologies based on RAMI 4.0 and identification of
requirements. Emerging technologies and factory automation (ETFA), 2016 IEEE 21st
international conference on (pp. 1–4). IEEE.


Fleisch, E., Weinberger, M., & Wortmann, F. (2015). Business models and the internet of
things. Interoperability and open-source solutions for the internet of things (pp. 6–10).
Cham: Springer.


Foehr, M., Vollmar, J., Calà, A., Leitão, P., Karnouskos, S., & Colombo, A. W. (2017).
Engineering of next generation cyber-physical automation system architectures.
Multi-disciplinary engineering for cyber-physical production systems (pp. 185–206).
Springer International Publishing.


Foerstl, K., Azadegan, A., Leppelt, T., & Hartmann, E. (2015). Drivers of supplier sus-
tainability: Moving beyond compliance to commitment. Journal of Supply Chain
Management, 51(1), 67–92.


Foerstl, K., Meinlschmidt, J., & Busse, C. (2018). It's a match! Choosing information
processing mechanisms to address sustainability-related uncertainty in sustainable
supply management. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management.


Frazzon, E. M., Hartmann, J., Makuschewitz, T., & Scholz-Reiter, B. (2013). Towards
socio-cyber-physical systems in production networks. Procedia CIRP, 7, 49–54.


Gaikwad, P. P., Gabhane, J. P., & Golait, S. S. (2015). A survey based on smart homes
system using internet-of-things. Computation of power, energy information and com-
munication (ICCPEIC), 2015 international conference on, April (pp. 0330–0335). IEEE.


Gavronski, I., Klassen, R. D., Vachon, S., & do Nascimento, L. F. M. (2011). A resource-
based view of green supply management. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 47(6), 872–885.


Gelbmann, U., & Hammerl, B. (2015). Integrative re-use systems as innovative business
models for devising sustainable product–service-systems. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 97, 50–60.


Genovese, A., Acquaye, A. A., Figueroa, A., & Koh, S. L. (2017). Sustainable supply chain
management and the transition towards a circular economy: Evidence and some
applications. Omega, 66, 344–357.


Ghelichi, Z., Saidi-Mehrabad, M., & Pishvaee, M. S. (2018). A stochastic programming
approach toward optimal design and planning of an integrated green biodiesel supply
chain network under uncertainty: A case study. Energy, 156, 661–687.


Gilchrist, A. (2016). Industry 4.0: The industrial internet of things. Apress.
Giusto, D., Iera, A., Morabito, G., & Atzori, L. (Eds.). (2010). The internet of things: 20th


Tyrrhenian workshop on digital communications. Springer Science & Business Media.
Gorecky, D., Schmitt, M., Loskyll, M., & Zühlke, D. (2014). Human-machine-interaction in


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0400

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0480

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.005

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0535

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0580

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0585




the industry 4.0 era. Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2014 12th IEEE international
conference on (pp. 289–294). IEEE.


Gotschol, A., De Giovanni, P., & Vinzi, V. E. (2014). Is environmental management an
economically sustainable business? Journal of Environmental Management, 144,
73–82.


Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., & Kannan, D. (2015). Reverse logistics and closed-loop
supply chain: A comprehensive review to explore the future. European Journal of
Operational Research, 240(3), 603–626.


Govindarajan, V., & Ramamurti, R. (2011). Reverse innovation, emerging markets, and
global strategy. Global Strategy Journal, 1(3–4), 191–205.


Gowen, C. R., & Tallon, W. J. (2005). Effect of technological intensity on the relationships
among Six Sigma design, electronic-business, and competitive advantage: A dynamic
capabilities model study. The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 16(1),
59–87.


Gregor, S. (2002). Design theory in information systems. Australasian Journal of
Information Systems, 10(1).


Grose, J., & Richardson, J. (2013). Managing a sustainable, low carbon supply chain in
the English National Health Service: The views of senior managers. Journal of Health
Services Research & Policy, 18(2), 83–89.


Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., & Palaniswami, M. (2013). Internet of Things (IoT): A
vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation Computer
Systems, 29(7), 1645–1660.


Guide, V. D. R. (2000). Production planning and control for remanufacturing: Industry
practice and research needs. Journal of Operations Management, 18(4), 467–483.


Guide, V. D. R., Jr., Teunter, R. H., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2003). Matching demand
and supply to maximize profits from remanufacturing. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 5(4), 303–316.


Guide, V. D. R., Jr., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2009). OR FORUM—The evolution of
closed-loop supply chain research. Operations Research, 57(1), 10–18.


Gunasekaran, A., & Kobu, B. (2007). Performance measures and metrics in logistics and
supply chain management: A review of recent literature (1995–2004) for research
and applications. International Journal of Production Research, 45(12), 2819–2840.


Gunasekaran, A., Kumar Tiwari, M., Dubey, R., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2016). Big data and
predictive analytics applications in supply chain management. Computers and
Industrial Engineering, 101(C), 525–527.


Gunasekaran, A., & Ngai, E. W. T. (2003). The successful management of a small logistics
company. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 33(9),
825–842.


Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Childe, S. J., Hazen, B., &
Akter, S. (2017). Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organiza-
tional performance. Journal of Business Research, 70, 308–317.


Gürbüz, T., Alptekin, S. E., & Alptekin, G. I. (2012). A hybrid MCDMmethodology for ERP
selection problem with interacting criteria. Decision Support Systems, 54(1), 206–214.


Hakim, A., & Hakim, H. (2010). A practical model on controlling the ERP implementation
risks. Information Systems, 35(2), 204–214.


Handfield, R., & Linton, T. (2017). GOOD! The ability to build balanced supply chains.
The LIVING supply chain: The evolving imperative of operating in real time (pp. 153–
173). .


Hassanalieragh, M., Page, A., Soyata, T., Sharma, G., Aktas, M., Mateos, G., Kantarci, B., &
Andreescu, S. (2015). Health monitoring and management using Internet-of-Things
(IoT) sensing with cloud-based processing: Opportunities and challenges. Services
computing (SCC), 2015 IEEE international conference on (pp. 285–292). IEEE.


Hazen, B. T., Boone, C. A., Ezell, J. D., & Jones-Farmer, L. A. (2014). Data quality for data
science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management: An in-
troduction to the problem and suggestions for research and applications. International
Journal of Production Economics, 154, 72–80.


Hazen, B. T., Skipper, J. B., Ezell, J. D., & Boone, C. A. (2016). Big Data and predictive
analytics for supply chain sustainability: A theory-driven research agenda. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 101, 592–598.


He, Y. (2017). Supply risk sharing in a closed-loop supply chain. International Journal of
Production Economics, 183, 39–52.


Hermann, M., Pentek, T., & Otto, B. (2016). Design principles for industrie 4.0 scenarios.
System sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii international conference on (pp. 3928–
3937). IEEE.


Hofmann, E., & Rüsch, M. (2017). Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future
prospects on logistics. Computers in Industry, 89, 23–34.


Hong, J. W., & Phitayawejwiwat, S. (2005). The impact of ISO 9000 certification on
quality management practices in Thailand. Journal of Industrial Technology,
21(1), 1–6.


Hossain, M. S., & Muhammad, G. (2016). Cloud-assisted industrial internet of things
(iiot)–enabled framework for health monitoring. Computer Networks, 101, 192–202.


Hou, H., Chaudhry, S., Chen, Y., & Hu, M. (2017). Physical distribution, logistics, supply
chain management, and the material flow theory: A historical perspective.
Information Technology and Management, 18(2), 107–117.


Hsin Chang, H., Tsai, Y. C., & Hsu, C. H. (2013). E-procurement and supply chain per-
formance. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 18(1), 34–51.


Huang, S. M., Chang, I. C., Li, S. H., & Lin, M. T. (2004). Assessing risk in ERP projects:
Identify and prioritize the factors. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 104(8),
681–688.


Huang, Y. C., Huang, C. H., & Yang, M. L. (2017). Drivers of green supply chain initiatives
and performance: Evidence from the electrical and electronics industries in Taiwan.
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 47(9), 796–819.


Huang, S. H., Liu, P., Mokasdar, A., & Hou, L. (2013). Additive manufacturing and its
societal impact: A literature review. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 1–13.


Hult, G. T. M., Ketchen, D. J., & Arrfelt, M. (2007). Strategic supply chain management:


Improving performance through a culture of competitiveness and knowledge devel-
opment. Strategic Management Journal, 28(10), 1035–1052.


Hwang, G., Lee, J., Park, J., & Chang, T. W. (2017). Developing performance measure-
ment system for Internet of Things and smart factory environment. International
Journal of Production Research, 55(9), 2590–2602.


Iera, A., Floerkemeier, C., Mitsugi, J., & Morabito, G. (2010). The internet of things [guest
editorial]. IEEE Wireless Communications, 17(6), 8–9.


Ilgin, M. A., & Gupta, S. M. (2011). Performance improvement potential of sensor em-
bedded products in environmental supply chains. Resources, Conservation and
Recycling, 55(6), 580–592.


Inderfurth, K., de Kok, A. G., & Flapper, S. D. P. (2001). Product recovery in stochastic
remanufacturing systems with multiple reuse options. European Journal of Operational
Research, 133(1), 130–152.


Inman, R. A., & Hubler, J. H. (1992). Certify the process, not just the product. Production
and Inventory Management Journal, 33(4), 11.


Irani, Z., Kamal, M. M., Sharif, A., & Love, P. E. (2017). Enabling sustainable energy
futures: Factors influencing green supply chain collaboration. Production Planning &
Control, 28(6–8), 684–705.


Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Sokolov, B., Werner, F., & Ivanova, M. (2016). A dynamic model
and an algorithm for short-term supply chain scheduling in the smart factory industry
4.0. International Journal of Production Research, 54(2), 386–402.


Jabbarzadeh, A., Fahimnia, B., & Sheu, J. B. (2017). An enhanced robustness approach for
managing supply and demand uncertainties. International Journal of Production
Economics, 183, 620–631.


Jafari, H., Hejazi, S. R., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2017). Sustainable development by waste
recycling under a three-echelon supply chain: A game-theoretic approach. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 142, 2252–2261.


Jayal, A. D., Badurdeen, F., Dillon, O. W., & Jawahir, I. S. (2010). Sustainable manu-
facturing: Modeling and optimization challenges at the product, process and system
levels. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 2(3), 144–152.


Jayaram, J., Xu, K., & Nicolae, M. (2011). The direct and contingency effects of supplier
coordination and customer coordination on quality and flexibility performance.
International Journal of Production Research, 49(1), 59–85.


Jazdi, N. (2014). Cyber physical systems in the context of Industry 4.0. Automation,
quality and testing, robotics, 2014 IEEE international conference on (pp. 1–4). IEEE.


Jeschke, S., Brecher, C., Meisen, T., Özdemir, D., & Eschert, T. (2017). Industrial internet
of things and cyber manufacturing systems. Industrial internet of things (pp. 3–19).
Springer International Publishing.


Ji, Z., Ganchev, I., O'Droma, M., Zhao, L., & Zhang, X. (2014). A cloud-based car parking
middleware for IoT-based smart cities: Design and implementation. Sensors, 14(12),
22372–22393.


Jie, Y. U., Subramanian, N., Ning, K., & Edwards, D. (2015). Product delivery service
provider selection and customer satisfaction in the era of internet of things: A Chinese
e-retailers’ perspective. International Journal of Production Economics, 159, 104–116.


Jing, Q., Vasilakos, A. V., Wan, J., Lu, J., & Qiu, D. (2014). Security of the internet of
things: Perspectives and challenges. Wireless Networks, 20(8), 2481–2501.


Jovane, F., Yoshikawa, H., Alting, L., Boër, C. R., Westkamper, E., Williams, D., ... Paci, A.
M. (2008). The incoming global technological and industrial revolution towards
competitive sustainable manufacturing. CIRP Annals-Manufacturing Technology,
57(2), 641–659.


Jung, D., Zhang, Z., & Winslett, M. (2017). Vibration analysis for IoT enabled predictive
maintenance. Data engineering (ICDE), 2017 IEEE 33rd international conference on (pp.
1271–1282). IEEE.


Kache, F., & Seuring, S. (2017). Challenges and opportunities of digital information at the
intersection of Big Data Analytics and supply chain management. International Journal
of Operations & Production Management, 37(1), 10–36.


Kadambala, D. K., Subramanian, N., Tiwari, M. K., Abdulrahman, M., & Liu, C. (2017).
Closed loop supply chain networks: Designs for energy and time value efficiency.
International Journal of Production Economics, 183, 382–393.


Kagermann, H. (2015). Change through digitization—Value creation in the age of
Industry 4.0. Management of permanent change (pp. 23–45). Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden.


Kai, Z., Ting, Q., Yanghua, P., Hao, L., Congdong, L., & Huang, G. Q. (2017). Cell-level
production-logistics synchronization for multi-variety and small-batch production: A
step toward industry 4.0. Networking, sensing and control (ICNSC), 2017 IEEE 14th
international conference on (pp. 419–424). IEEE.


Kang, H. S., Lee, J. Y., Choi, S., Kim, H., Park, J. H., Son, J. Y., ... Do Noh, S. (2016). Smart
manufacturing: Past research, present findings, and future directions. International
Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 3(1), 111–128.


Karre, H., Hammer, M., Kleindienst, M., & Ramsauer, C. (2017). Transition towards an
Industry 4.0 state of the LeanLab at Graz University of Technology. Procedia
Manufacturing, 9, 206–213.


Kathawala, Y., & Abdou, K. (2003). Supply chain evaluation in the service industry: A
framework development compared to manufacturing. Managerial Auditing Journal,
18(2), 140–149.


Kauppi, K. (2013). Extending the use of institutional theory in operations and supply
chain management research: Review and research suggestions. International Journal
of Operations & Production Management, 33(10), 1318–1345.


Kaynak, H. (2003). The relationship between total quality management practices and
their effects on firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 21(4), 405–435.


Keramydas, C., Mallidis, I., Dekker, R., Vlachos, D., & Iakovou, E. (2017). Cost and en-
vironmental trade-offs in supply chain network design and planning: The merit of a
simulation-based approach. Journal of Simulation, 11(1), 20–29.


Khan, M. R., Hasan, A., Ray, S. K., Saha, A., & Abdul, A. B. M. (2013). Autonomous order
processing system for supply chain management – An initiative to match demand and
supply for processed food industries in Bangladesh. International Journal of Modern


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0695

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0730

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0740

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0800

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0885




Engineering Research (IJMER), 3(6), 3348–3358.
Khan, R., Khan, S. U., Zaheer, R., & Khan, S. (2012). Future internet: The internet of


things architecture, possible applications and key challenges. Frontiers of information
technology (FIT), 2012 10th international conference (pp. 257–260). IEEE.


Khonpikul, S., Jakrawatana, N., Sangkaew, P., & Gheewala, S. H. (2017). Resource use
and improvement strategy analysis of the livestock and feed production supply chain
in Thailand. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 1–13.


Khor, K. S., & Udin, Z. M. (2012). Impact of reverse logistics product disposition towards
business performance in Malaysian E&E companies. Journal of Supply Chain and
Customer Relationship Management, 2012, 1.


Kiel, D., Arnold, C., & Voigt, K. I. (2017). The influence of the Industrial Internet of Things
on business models of established manufacturing companies – A business level per-
spective. Technovation, 68, 4–19.


Kim, J., Kim, H., Lakshmanan, K., & Rajkumar, R. R. (2013). Parallel scheduling for cyber-
physical systems: Analysis and case study on a self-driving car. Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE 4th international conference on cyber-physical systems (pp. 31–40). ACM.


Kleindorfer, P. R., Singhal, K., & Wassenhove, L. N. (2005). Sustainable operations
management. Production and Operations Management, 14(4), 482–492.


Kocabasoglu, C., Prahinski, C., & Klassen, R. D. (2007). Linking forward and reverse
supply chain investments: The role of business uncertainty. Journal of Operations
Management, 25(6), 1141–1160.


Kochan, D., & Miksche, R. (2017). Advanced manufacturing and industrie 4.0 for SME.
International conference on advanced manufacturing engineering and technologies (pp.
357–364). Cham: Springer.


Kogg, B., & Mont, O. (2012). Environmental and social responsibility in supply chains:
The practise of choice and inter-organisational management. Ecological Economics,
83, 154–163.


Kolberg, D., & Zühlke, D. (2015). Lean automation enabled by industry 4.0 technologies.
IFAC-Papers OnLine, 48(3), 1870–1875.


Kölsch, P., Herder, C. F., Zimmermann, V., & Aurich, J. C. (2017). A novel concept for the
development of availability-oriented business models. Procedia CIRP, 64, 340–344.


Kozlowski, A., Searcy, C., & Bardecki, M. (2015). Corporate sustainability reporting in the
apparel industry: An analysis of indicators disclosed. International Journal of
Productivity and Performance Management, 64(3), 377–397.


Krause, D. R., Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2009). Special topic forum on sustainable
supply chain management: Introduction and reflections on the role of purchasing
management. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 45(4), 18–25.


Kumar, A., & Rahman, S. (2014). RFID-enabled process reengineering of closed-loop
supply chains in the healthcare industry of Singapore. Journal of Cleaner Production,
85, 382–394.


Kuo, T. C., Chen, G. Y. H., Hsiao, Y. L., Dang, H. T., Chiu, M. C., & Hsu, C. W. (2017).
Investigating the influential factors of sustainable supply chain management, using
two asian countries as examples. Sustainable Development, 25(6), 559–579.


Lambert, D. M., & Cooper, M. C. (2000). Issues in supply chain management. Industrial
Marketing Management, 29(1), 65–83.


Lange, P., Driessen, P. P., Sauer, A., Bornemann, B., & Burger, P. (2013). Governing to-
wards sustainability—Conceptualizing modes of governance. Journal of Environmental
Policy & Planning, 15(3), 403–425.


Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H. G., Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Industry 4.0. Business
& Information Systems Engineering, 6(4), 239–242.


Lee, E. A. (2008). Cyber physical systems: Design challenges. Object oriented real-time
distributed computing (isorc), 2008 11th IEEE international symposium on (pp. 363–369).
IEEE.


Lee, J., Bagheri, B., & Kao, H. A. (2015). A cyber-physical systems architecture for in-
dustry 4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manufacturing Letters, 3, 18–23.


Lee, J., Kao, H. A., & Yang, S. (2014). Service innovation and smart analytics for industry
4.0 and big data environment. Procedia CIRP, 16, 3–8.


Lee, J., Lapira, E., Bagheri, B., & Kao, H. A. (2013). Recent advances and trends in pre-
dictive manufacturing systems in big data environment. Manufacturing Letters, 1(1),
38–41.


Lee, I., & Lee, K. (2015). The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, investments, and
challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons, 58(4), 431–440.


Leng, K., Jin, L., Shi, W., & Van Nieuwenhuyse, I. (2018). Research on agricultural pro-
ducts supply chain inspection system based on internet of things. Cluster
Computing, 1–9.


Leng, Y., & Zhao, L. (2011). Novel design of intelligent internet-of-vehicles management
system based on cloud-computing and internet-of-things. Electronic and mechanical
engineering and information technology (EMEIT), 2011 international conference on: Vol.
6, (pp. 3190–3193). IEEE.


Leppelt, T., Foerstl, K., Reuter, C., & Hartmann, E. (2013). Sustainability management
beyond organizational boundaries–sustainable supplier relationship management in
the chemical industry. Journal of Cleaner Production, 56, 94–102.


Li, L. (2002). Information sharing in a supply chain with horizontal competition.
Management Science, 48(9), 1196–1212.


Li, Y. (2011). ERP adoption in Chinese small enterprise: An exploratory case study.
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 22(4), 489–505.


Li, C. Z., Hong, J., Xue, F., Shen, G. Q., Xu, X., & Luo, L. (2016). SWOT analysis and
Internet of Things-enabled platform for prefabrication housing production in Hong
Kong. Habitat International, 57, 74–87.


Li, B., & Li, Y. (2017). Internet of things drives supply chain innovation: A research fra-
mework. International Journal of Organizational Innovation, 9(3), 71–92.


Li, X., Li, D., Wan, J., Vasilakos, A. V., Lai, C. F., & Wang, S. (2017). A review of industrial
wireless networks in the context of industry 4.0. Wireless Networks, 23(1), 23–41.


Li, Z., Liu, G., Liu, L., Lai, X., & Xu, G. (2017). IoT-based tracking and tracing platform for
prepackaged food supply chain. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 117(9),
1906–1916.


Li, S., Ragu-Nathan, B., Ragu-Nathan, T. S., & Rao, S. S. (2006). The impact of supply
chain management practices on competitive advantage and organizational perfor-
mance. Omega, 34(2), 107–124.


Li, S., Rao, S. S., Ragu-Nathan, T. S., & Ragu-Nathan, B. (2005). Development and vali-
dation of a measurement instrument for studying supply chain management prac-
tices. Journal of Operations Management, 23(6), 618–641.


Li, Y., Wu, F., Zong, W., & Li, B. (2017). Supply chain collaboration for ERP im-
plementation: An inter-organizational knowledge-sharing perspective. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 37(10), 1327–1347.


Lian-yue, W. (2012). Think of construction lean SCM based on IOT. Robotics and appli-
cations (ISRA), 2012 IEEE symposium on (pp. 436–438). IEEE.


Liao, Y., Deschamps, F., Loures, E. D. F. R., & Ramos, L. F. P. (2017). Past, present and
future of Industry 4.0 – A systematic literature review and research agenda proposal.
International Journal of Production Research, 55(12), 3609–3629.


Liao, S. H., Hu, D. C., & Ding, L. W. (2017). Assessing the influence of supply chain
collaboration value innovation, supply chain capability and competitive advantage in
Taiwan's networking communication industry. International Journal of Production
Economics, 191, 143–153.


Lim, M. K., Tseng, M. L., Tan, K. H., & Bui, T. D. (2017). Knowledge management in
sustainable supply chain management: Improving performance through an inter-
pretive structural modelling approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 162, 806–816.


Lin, R. J. (2013). Using fuzzy DEMATEL to evaluate the green supply chain management
practices. Journal of Cleaner Production, 40, 32–39.


Lin, Y. C., Hung, M. H., Huang, H. C., Chen, C. C., Yang, H. C., Hsieh, Y. S., & Cheng, F. T.
(2017). Development of advanced manufacturing cloud of things (AMCoT)—A smart
manufacturing platform. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2(3), 1809–1816.


Linton, J. D. (2017). Emerging technology supply chains (pp. 1–3).
Liu, Z., Choo, K. K. R., & Zhao, M. (2017). Practical-oriented protocols for privacy-pre-


serving outsourced big data analysis: Challenges and future research directions.
Computers & Security, 69, 97–113.


Lom, M., Pribyl, O., & Svitek, M. (2016). Industry 4.0 as a part of smart cities. Smart cities
symposium Prague (SCSP), 2016 (pp. 1–6). IEEE.


Longo, F., Nicoletti, L., & Padovano, A. (2017). Smart operators in industry 4.0: A human-
centered approach to enhance operators’ capabilities and competencies within the
new smart factory context. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 113, 144–159. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.09.016.


Lucke, D., Constantinescu, C., & Westkämper, E. (2008). Smart factory – A step towards
the next generation of manufacturing. Manufacturing systems and technologies for the
new frontier (pp. 115–118). .


Lummus, R. R., & Vokurka, R. J. (1999). Defining supply chain management: A historical
perspective and practical guidelines. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 99(1),
11–17.


Lymberis, A., & Olsson, S. (2003). Intelligent biomedical clothing for personal health and
disease management: State of the art and future vision. Telemedicine Journal and E-
health, 9(4), 379–386.


MacCarthy, B. L., Blome, C., Olhager, J., Srai, J. S., & Zhao, X. (2016). Supply chain
evolution – theory, concepts and science. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, 36(12), 1696–1718.


MacDougall, W. (2014). Industrie 4.0: Smart manufacturing for the future. Germany Trade &
Invest.


Machowiak, W. (2012). Risk management-unappreciated instrument of supply chain
management strategy. LogForum, 8(4).


Madani, S. R., & Rasti-Barzoki, M. (2017). Sustainable supply chain management with
pricing, greening and governmental tariffs determining strategies: A game-theoretic
approach. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 105, 287–298. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cie.2017.01.017.


Majeed, A. A., & Rupasinghe, T. D. (2017). Internet of things (IoT) embedded future
supply chains for industry 4.0: An assessment from an ERP-based fashion apparel and
footwear industry. International Journal of Supply Chain Management, 6(1), 25–40.


Majumder, P., & Groenevelt, H. (2001). Competition in remanufacturing. Production and
Operations Management, 10(2), 125–141.


Mani, V., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Hazen, B., & Dubey, R. (2016). Supply chain
social sustainability for developing nations: Evidence from India. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 111, 42–52.


Mathivathanan, D., Kannan, D., & Haq, A. N. (2018). Sustainable supply chain manage-
ment practices in Indian automotive industry: A multi-stakeholder view. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 128, 284–305.


Mathiyazhagan, K., Diabat, A., Al-Refaie, A., & Xu, L. (2015). Application of analytical
hierarchy process to evaluate pressures to implement green supply chain manage-
ment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 107, 229–236.


Mathiyazhagan, K., Govindan, K., NoorulHaq, A., & Geng, Y. (2013). An ISM approach for
the barrier analysis in implementing green supply chain management. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 47, 283–297.


McAdam, R., & Galloway, A. (2005). Enterprise resource planning and organizational
innovation: A management perspective. Industrial Management & Data Systems,
105(3), 280–290.


McKenna, R., Reith, S., Cail, S., Kessler, A., & Fichtner, W. (2013). Energy savings through
direct secondary reuse: An exemplary analysis of the German automotive sector.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 52, 103–112.


Melnyk, S. A., Lummus, R. R., Vokurka, R. J., Burns, L. J., & Sandor, J. (2009). Mapping
the future of supply chain management: A Delphi study. International Journal of
Production Research, 47(16), 4629–4653.


Mentzer, J. T., DeWitt, W., Keebler, J. S., Min, S., Nix, N. W., Smith, C. D., & Zacharia, Z.
G. (2001). Defining supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2),
1–25 8.


Mexas, M. P., Quelhas, O. L. G., & Costa, H. G. (2012). Prioritization of enterprise resource


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0920

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0920

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0920

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0930

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0930

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0930

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0955

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0955

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0955

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0980

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0980

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0980

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h0995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1105

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.09.016

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.09.016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1140

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.017

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.017

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1200




planning systems criteria: Focusing on construction industry. International Journal of
Production Economics, 139(1), 340–350.


Michahelles, F., Ilic, A., Kunze, K., Kritzler, M., & Schneegass, S. (2017). IoT 2016. IEEE
Pervasive Computing, 16(2), 87–89.


Min, H., & Zhou, G. (2002). Supply chain modeling: Past, present and future. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 43(1), 231–249.


Miorandi, D., Sicari, S., De Pellegrini, F., & Chlamtac, I. (2012). Internet of things: Vision,
applications and research challenges. Ad Hoc Networks, 10(7), 1497–1516.


Mohammaddust, F., Rezapour, S., Farahani, R. Z., Mofidfar, M., & Hill, A. (2017).
Developing lean and responsive supply chains: A robust model for alternative risk
mitigation strategies in supply chain designs. International Journal of Production
Economics, 183, 632–653.


Monostori, L. (2014). Cyber-physical production systems: Roots, expectations and R&D
challenges. Procedia CIRP, 17, 9–13.


Monostori, L., Kádár, B., Bauernhansl, T., Kondoh, S., Kumara, S., Reinhart, G., ... Ueda,
K. (2016). Cyber-physical systems in manufacturing. CIRP Annals-Manufacturing
Technology, 65(2), 621–641.


Morgan, J., & Monczka, R. M. (1995). Alliances for new products. Purchasing, 118(1),
103–106.


Mourtzis, D., Doukas, M., & Bernidaki, D. (2014). Simulation in manufacturing: Review
and challenges. Procedia CIRP, 25, 213–229.


Moussa, F. Z. B., Rasovska, I., Dubois, S., De Guio, R., & Benmoussa, R. (2017). Reviewing
the use of the theory of inventive problem solving (TRIZ) in green supply chain
problems. Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 2677–2692.


Nagalingam, S. V., Kuik, S. S., & Amer, Y. (2013). Performance measurement of product
returns with recovery for sustainable manufacturing. Robotics and Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing, 29(6), 473–483.


Nagurney, A., Daniele, P., & Shukla, S. (2017). A supply chain network game theory
model of cybersecurity investments with nonlinear budget constraints. Annals of
Operations Research, 248(1–2), 405–427.


Narasimhan, R., & Kim, S. W. (2001). Information system utilization strategy for supply
chain integration. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 51–75.


Newell, S., Tansley, C., & Huang, J. (2004). Social capital and knowledge integration in
an ERP project team: The importance of bridging and bonding. British Journal of
Management, 15(S1), 43–57.


Niesten, E., Jolink, A., de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., Chappin, M., & Lozano, R. (2017).
Sustainable collaboration: The impact of governance and institutions on sustainable
performance. Journal of Cleaner Production, 155, 1–6.


Ning, H., & Wang, Z. (2011). Future internet of things architecture: Like mankind neural
system or social organization framework? IEEE Communications Letters, 15(4),
461–463.


Nobre, G. C., & Tavares, E. (2017). Scientific literature analysis on big data and internet of
things applications on circular economy: A bibliometric study. Scientometrics, 111(1),
463–492.


Noshad, K., & Awasthi, A. (2015). Supplier quality development: A review of literature
and industry practices. International Journal of Production Research, 53(2), 466–487.


Olsson, H. H., Bosch, J., & Katumba, B. (2016). Exploring IoT user dimensions: A multi-
case study on user interactions in ‘internet of things’ systems. Product-focused software
process improvement: 17th international conference, PROFES 2016, Trondheim, Norway,
November 22–24, 2016, proceedings 17 (pp. 477–484). Springer International
Publishing.


Ondemir, O., Ilgin, M. A., & Gupta, S. M. (2012). Optimal end-of-life management in
closed-loop supply chains using RFID and sensors. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 8(3), 719–728.


Ong, S. K., Yuan, M. L., & Nee, A. Y. C. (2008). Augmented reality applications in man-
ufacturing: A survey. International Journal of Production Research, 46(10), 2707–2742.


Ou, C. S., Liu, F. C., Hung, Y. C., & Yen, D. C. (2010). A structural model of supply chain
management on firm performance. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 30(5), 526–545.


Oztemel, E., & Gursev, S. (2018). Literature review of Industry 4.0 and related technol-
ogies. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 1–56.


Paelke, V. (2014). Augmented reality in the smart factory: Supporting workers in an in-
dustry 4.0. environment. Emerging technology and factory automation (ETFA), 2014
IEEE (pp. 1–4). IEEE.


Pagell, M., & Shevchenko, A. (2014). Why research in sustainable supply chain man-
agement should have no future. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 50(1), 44–55.


Pagell, M., & Wu, Z. (2017). Business implications of sustainability practices in supply
chains. Sustainable supply chains (pp. 339–353). Springer International Publishing.


Pal, A., & Kant, K. (2018). IoT-based sensing and communications infrastructure for the
fresh food supply chain. Computer, 51(2), 76–80.


Palanisamy, R. (2008). Organizational culture and knowledge management in ERP im-
plementation: An empirical study. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 48(2),
100–120.


Pang, Z. (2013). Technologies and architectures of the internet-of-things (IoT) for health and
well-being. Doctoral dissertationKTH Royal Institute of Technology.


Pang, Z., Chen, Q., & Zheng, L. (2012). Value creation, sensor portfolio and information
fusion of internet-of-things solutions for food supply chains. Information Systems
Frontiers.


Papakostas, N., O'Connor, J., & Byrne, G. (2016). Internet of things technologies in
manufacturing: Application areas, challenges and outlook. Information society (i-
Society), 2016 international conference on (pp. 126–131). IEEE.


Pappis, C. P., Rachaniotis, N. P., & Tsoulfas, G. T. (2005). Recovery and reuse of maritime
containers: The Blue Container Line case. Managing closed-loop supply chains (pp. 57–
63). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.


Parkhi, S., Joshi, S., Gupta, S., & Sharma, M. (2015). A study of evolution and future of
supply chain management. Supply Chain Management, 9(2), 95–106.


Parry, G., Brax, S. A., Maull, R., & Ng, I. (2016). Visibility of consumer context: Improving
reverse supply with internet of things data. Supply Chain Management: International
Journal, 21(2), 228–244.


Patel, S. M., & Kanawade, S. Y. (2017). Internet of things based smart home with Intel
edison. Proceedings of international conference on communication and networks (pp.
385–392). Singapore: Springer.


Peng, S., Su, G., Chen, J., & Du, P. (2017). Design of an IoT-BIM-GIS based risk man-
agement system for hospital basic operation. Service-oriented system engineering
(SOSE), 2017 IEEE symposium on (pp. 69–74). IEEE.


Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Christen, P., & Georgakopoulos, D. (2014). Sensing as a service
model for smart cities supported by internet of things. Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies, 25(1), 81–93.


Peres, R. S., Rocha, A. D., Coelho, A., & Oliveira, J. B. (2017). A highly flexible, dis-
tributed data analysis framework for industry 4.0 manufacturing systems. Service
orientation in holonic and multi-agent manufacturing (pp. 373–381). Cham: Springer.


Pfohl, H. C., & Gomm, M. (2009). Supply chain finance: Optimizing financial flows in
supply chains. Logistics Research, 1(3–4), 149–161.


Pfohl, H. C., Yahsi, B., & Kurnaz, T. (2017). Concept and diffusion-factors of industry 4.0
in the supply chain. Dynamics in logistics (pp. 381–390). Springer International
Publishing.


Piplani, R., Pujawan, N., & Ray, S. (2008). Sustainable supply chain management.
Pisching, M. A., Junqueira, F., Santos Filho, D. J., & Miyagi, P. E. (2015b). An architecture


for organizing and locating services to the industry 4.0. Proceedings of 23rd ABCM
international congress of mechanical engineering, December (pp. 8). r462TX4E.


Pisching, M. A., Junqueira, F., Santos Filho, D. J., & Miyagi, P. E. (2015a). Service
composition in the cloud-based manufacturing focused on the industry 4.0. DoCEIS,
April (pp. 65–72). .


Prajogo, D., Chowdhury, M., Yeung, A. C., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2012). The relationship
between supplier management and firm's operational performance: A multi-dimen-
sional perspective. International Journal of Production Economics, 136(1), 123–130.


Pye, A. (2014). The Internet of Things: Connecting the unconnected. Engineering &
Technology, 9(11), 64 64-64.


Qaiser, F. H., Ahmed, K., Sykora, M., Choudhary, A., & Simpson, M. (2017). Decision
support systems for sustainable logistics: A review and bibliometric analysis.
Industrial Management & Data Systems, 117(7), 1376–1388.


Qi, Y., Huo, B., Wang, Z., & Yeung, H. Y. J. (2017). The impact of operations and supply
chain strategies on integration and performance. International Journal of Production
Economics, 185, 162–174.


Qiang, Q. P. (2015). The closed-loop supply chain network with competition and design
for remanufactureability. Journal of Cleaner Production, 105, 348–356.


Qiu, X., Luo, H., Xu, G., Zhong, R., & Huang, G. Q. (2015). Physical assets and service
sharing for IoT-enabled Supply Hub in Industrial Park (SHIP). International Journal of
Production Economics, 159, 4–15.


Qiuping, W., Shunbing, Z., & Chunquan, D. (2011). Study on key technologies of Internet
of Things perceiving mine. Procedia Engineering, 26, 2326–2333.


Qu, T., Thürer, M., Wang, J., Wang, Z., Fu, H., Li, C., & Huang, G. Q. (2017). System
dynamics analysis for an Internet-of-Things-enabled production logistics system.
International Journal of Production Research, 55(9), 2622–2649.


Quesada, H., Gazo, R., & Sanchez, S. (2012). Critical factors affecting supply chain man-
agement: A case study in the US pallet industry. Pathways to supply chain excellence.
InTech.


Radziwon, A., Bilberg, A., Bogers, M., & Madsen, E. S. (2014). The smart factory:
Exploring adaptive and flexible manufacturing solutions. Procedia Engineering, 69,
1184–1190.


Ragatz, G. L., Handfield, R. B., & Scannell, T. V. (1997). Success factors for integrating
suppliers into new product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management,
14(3), 190–202.


Rajkumar, R. R., Lee, I., Sha, L., & Stankovic, J. (2010). Cyber-physical systems: The next
computing revolution. Proceedings of the 47th design automation conference (pp. 731–
736). ACM.


Rao, P. (2005). The greening of suppliers—In the South East Asian context. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 13(9), 935–945.


Rao, P., & Holt, D. (2005). Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and economic
performance? International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 25(9),
898–916.


Reaidy, P. J., Gunasekaran, A., & Spalanzani, A. (2015). Bottom-up approach based on
internet of things for order fulfillment in a collaborative warehousing environment.
International Journal of Production Economics, 159, 29–40.


Rezaee, A., Dehghanian, F., Fahimnia, B., & Beamon, B. (2017). Green supply chain
network design with stochastic demand and carbon price. Annals of Operations
Research, 250(2), 463–485.


Rezaei, M., Akbarpour Shirazi, M., & Karimi, B. (2017). IoT-based framework for per-
formance measurement: A real-time supply chain decision alignment. Industrial
Management & Data Systems, 117(4), 688–712.


Riedl, M., Zipper, H., Meier, M., & Diedrich, C. (2014). Cyber-physical systems alter
automation architectures. Annual Reviews in Control, 38(1), 123–133.


Riel, A., & Flatscher, M. (2017). A design process approach to strategic production
planning for industry 4.0. European conference on software process improvement (pp.
323–333). Cham: Springer.


Rodger, J. A., & George, J. A. (2017). Triple bottom line accounting for optimizing natural
gas sustainability: A statistical linear programming fuzzy ILOWA optimized sustain-
ment model approach to reducing supply chain global cybersecurity vulnerability
through information and communications technology. Journal of Cleaner Production,
142, 1931–1949.


Rong, K., Hu, G., Lin, Y., Shi, Y., & Guo, L. (2015). Understanding business ecosystem
using a 6C framework in Internet-of-Things-based sectors. International Journal of


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1320

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1325

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1330

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1335

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1340

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1345

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1350

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1355

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1360

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1365

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1370

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1375

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1380

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1385

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1390

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1395

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1405

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1410

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1415

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1420

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1425

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1430

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1435

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1440

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1445

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1450

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1455

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1460

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1465

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1470

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1475

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1480

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1485

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1490

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1495

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1500

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1505

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1510

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1515




Production Economics, 159, 41–55.
Rosas, J. C., Aguilar, J. A., Tripp-Barba, C., Espinosa, R., & Aguilar, P. (2017). A mobile-


sensor fire prevention system based on the internet of things. International conference
on computational science and its applications (pp. 274–283). Cham: Springer.


Rossetti, C. L., Handfield, R., & Dooley, K. J. (2011). Forces, trends, and decisions in
pharmaceutical supply chain management. International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, 41(6), 601–622.


Ruiz-Benitez, R., López, C., & Real, J. C. (2017). Environmental benefits of lean, green and
resilient supply chain management: The case of the aerospace sector. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 167, 850–862.


Rüßmann, M., Lorenz, M., Gerbert, P., Waldner, M., Justus, J., Engel, P., & Harnisch, M.
(2015). Industry 4.0: The future of productivity and growth in manufacturing in-
dustries (p. 9). Boston Consulting Group.


Saberi, S., Cruz, J. M., Sarkis, J., & Nagurney, A. (2018). A competitive multiperiod
supply chain network model with freight carriers and green technology investment
option. European Journal of Operational Research, 266(3), 934–949.


Sadeghi, A. R., Wachsmann, C., & Waidner, M. (2015). Security and privacy challenges in
industrial internet of things. Design automation conference (DAC), 2015 52nd ACM/
EDAC/IEEE (pp. 1–6). IEEE.


Saeed, K. A., Malhotra, M. K., & Grover, V. (2005). Examining the impact of inter-
organizational systems on process efficiency and sourcing leverage in buyer–supplier
dyads. Decision Sciences, 36(3), 365–396.


Sahay, B. S., & Ranjan, J. (2008). Real time business intelligence in supply chain analy-
tics. Information Management & Computer Security, 16(1), 28–48.


Saldivar, A. A. F., Li, Y., Chen, W. N., Zhan, Z. H., Zhang, J., & Chen, L. Y. (2015). Industry
4.0 with cyber-physical integration: A design and manufacture perspective.
Automation and computing (icac), 2015 21st international conference on (pp. 1–6). IEEE.


Salonitis, K., & Stavropoulos, P. (2013). On the integration of the CAx systems towards
sustainable production. Procedia CIRP, 9, 115–120.


Sanders, A., Subramanian, K. R., Redlich, T., & Wulfsberg, J. P. (2017). Industry 4.0 and
lean management-synergy or contradiction? IFIP international conference on advances
in production management systems (pp. 341–349). Cham: Springer.


Sanislav, T., Zeadally, S., & Mois, G. D. (2017). A cloud-integrated, multilayered, agent-
based cyber-physical system architecture. Computer, 50(4), 27–37.


Sari, K. (2017). A novel multi-criteria decision framework for evaluating green supply
chain management practices. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 105, 338–347.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.016.


Sarkis, J. (2003). A strategic decision framework for green supply chain management.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 11(4), 397–409.


Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q., & Lai, K. H. (2011). An organizational theoretic review of green supply
chain management literature. International Journal of Production Economics, 130(1),
1–15.


Sasikumar, P., & Kannan, G. (2008a). Issues in reverse supply chains, part I: End-of-life
product recovery and inventory management – An overview. International Journal of
Sustainable Engineering, 1(3), 154–172.


Sasikumar, P., & Kannan, G. (2008b). Issues in reverse supply chains, part II: Reverse
distribution issues – an overview. International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, 1(4),
234–249.


Satoglu, S., Ustundag, A., Cevikcan, E., & Durmusoglu, M. B. (2018). Lean production
systems for industry 4.0. Industry 4.0: Managing the digital transformation (pp. 43–59).
Cham: Springer.


Satpute, P., & Tembhurne, O. (2014). A review of: Cloud centric IoT based framework for
supply chain management in precision agriculture. International Journal of Advance
Research in Computer Science and Management Studies, 2(11), 14–23.


Sauer, P. C., & Seuring, S. (2017). Sustainable supply chain management for minerals.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 151, 235–249.


Savaskan, R. C., Bhattacharya, S., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2004). Closed-loop supply
chain models with product remanufacturing. Management Science, 50(2), 239–252.


Sayyadi, R., & Awasthi, A. (2017). A system dynamics based simulation model to evaluate
regulatory policies for sustainable transportation planning. International Journal of
Modelling and Simulation, 37(1), 25–35.


Schaltegger, S., & Wagner, M. (2011). Sustainable entrepreneurship and sustainability
innovation: Categories and interactions. Business Strategy and the Environment, 20(4),
222–237.


Schirner, G., Erdogmus, D., Chowdhury, K., & Padir, T. (2013). The future of human-in-
the-loop cyber-physical systems. Computer, 46(1), 36–45.


Schmidt, R., Möhring, M., Härting, R. C., Reichstein, C., Neumaier, P., & Jozinović, P.
(2015). Industry 4.0-potentials for creating smart products: Empirical research re-
sults. International conference on business information systems, June (pp. 16–27). Cham:
Springer.


Scholten, K., & Fynes, B. (2017). Risk and uncertainty management for sustainable supply
chains. Sustainable supply chains (pp. 413–436). Springer International Publishing.


Schuh, G., Potente, T., Wesch-Potente, C., Weber, A. R., & Prote, J. P. (2014).
Collaboration mechanisms to increase productivity in the context of industrie 4.0.
Procedia CIRP, 19, 51–56.


Schweer, D., & Sahl, J. C. (2017). The digital transformation of industry-the benefit for
Germany. The drivers of digital transformation (pp. 23–31). Springer International
Publishing.


Sedera, D., & Gable, G. G. (2010). Knowledge management competence for enterprise
system success. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 19(4), 296–306.


Senvar, O., Tuzkaya, U. R., & Kahraman, C. (2014). Supply chain performance mea-
surement: An integrated DEMATEL and fuzzy-ANP approach. Supply chain manage-
ment under fuzziness (pp. 143–165). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.


Seuring, S. (2013). A review of modeling approaches for sustainable supply chain man-
agement. Decision Support Systems, 54(4), 1513–1520.


Seuring, S., & Müller, M. (2008). From a literature review to a conceptual framework for


sustainable supply chain management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15),
1699–1710.


Seuring, S., & Müller, M. (2008). Core issues in sustainable supply chain management – A
Delphi study. Business Strategy and the Environment, 17(8), 455–466.


Sha, L., Xiao, F., Chen, W., & Sun, J. (2017). IIoT-SIDefender: Detecting and defense
against the sensitive information leakage in industry IoT. World Wide Web, 1–30.


Shafiq, S. I., Sanin, C., Szczerbicki, E., & Toro, C. (2015). Virtual engineering object/
virtual engineering process: A specialized form of cyber physical system for Industrie
4.0. Procedia Computer Science, 60, 1146–1155.


Shah, M. (2016). Big Data and the internet of things. Big data analysis: New algorithms for a
new society (pp. 207–237). Springer International Publishing.


Shaikh, F. K., Zeadally, S., & Exposito, E. (2017). Enabling technologies for green internet
of things. IEEE Systems Journal, 11(2), 983–994.


Sharma, A., Iyer, G. R., Mehrotra, A., & Krishnan, R. (2010). Sustainability and business-
to-business marketing: A framework and implications. Industrial Marketing
Management, 39(2), 330–341.


Shen, L., Olfat, L., Govindan, K., Khodaverdi, R., & Diabat, A. (2013). A fuzzy multi
criteria approach for evaluating green supplier's performance in green supply chain
with linguistic preferences. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 74, 170–179.


Shrouf, F., & Miragliotta, G. (2015). Energy management based on Internet of Things:
Practices and framework for adoption in production management. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 100, 235–246.


Shrouf, F., Ordieres, J., & Miragliotta, G. (2014). Smart factories in Industry 4.0: A review
of the concept and of energy management approached in production based on the
Internet of Things paradigm. Industrial engineering and engineering management
(IEEM), 2014 IEEE international conference on (pp. 697–701). IEEE.


Siemens (2016). Totally integrated automation in the digital enterprise: On the way to
Industrie 4.0. Available at: <https://w3.siemens.com/topics/global/de/partner-
programm/branchenveranstaltungen/Documents/end-customer-forum-fub/3_TIA%
20in%20DE.pdf> Accessed August, 2017.


Siemieniuch, C. E., & Sinclair, M. A. (2015). Global drivers, sustainable manufacturing
and systems ergonomics. Applied Ergonomics, 51, 104–119.


Simchi-Levi, D. K., & Simchi-Levi, P. E. (2003). Designing and managing the supply chain:
Concepts, strategies, and cases.


Singer, M., Donoso, P., & Traverso, P. (2003). Quality strategies in supply chain alliances
of disposable items. Omega, 31(6), 499–509.


Song, T., Li, R., Mei, B., Yu, J., Xing, X., & Cheng, X. (2016). A privacy preserving
communication protocol for IoT applications in smart homes. Identification, in-
formation and knowledge in the internet of things (IIKI), 2016 international conference on
(pp. 519–524). IEEE.


Spath, D., Gerlach, S., Hämmerle, M., Schlund, S., & Strölin, T. (2013). Cyber-physical
system for self-organised and flexible labour utilisation. Personnel, 50, 22.


Speranza, M. G. (2018). Trends in transportation and logistics. European Journal of
Operational Research, 264(3), 830–836.


Springett, D. (2003). Business conceptions of sustainable development: A perspective
from critical theory. Business Strategy and the Environment, 12(2), 71–86.


Squire, B., Cousins, P. D., Lawson, B., & Brown, S. (2009). The effect of supplier manu-
facturing capabilities on buyer responsiveness: The role of collaboration. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 29(8), 766–788.


Srivastava, S. K. (2007). Green supply-chain management: A state-of-the-art literature
review. International Journal of Management Reviews, 9(1), 53–80.


Stefanou, C. (1999). Supply chain management (SCM) and organizational key factors for
successful implementation of enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems. AMCIS
1999 proceedings (pp. 276). .


Stefanou, C. J., & Revanoglou, A. (2006). ERP integration in a healthcare environment: A
case study. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 19(1), 115–130.


Stock, T., & Seliger, G. (2016). Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in industry
4.0. Procedia CIRP, 40, 536–541.


Strang, D., & Anderl, R. (2014). Assembly process driven component data model in cyber-
physical production systems. Proceedings of the world congress on engineering and com-
puter science.


Sun, M., Mohan, S., Sha, L., & Gunter, C. (2009). Addressing safety and security contra-
dictions in cyber-physical systems. Proceedings of the 1st workshop on future directions in
cyber-physical systems security, July (CPSSW’09).


Sun, H., Ni, W., & Lam, R. (2015). A step-by-step performance assessment and im-
provement method for ERP implementation: Action case studies in Chinese compa-
nies. Computers in Industry, 68, 40–52.


Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and challenges for
realising the Internet of Things. Cluster of European Research Projects on the Internet of
Things, European Commission, 3(3), 34–36.


Tajima, M. (2007). Strategic value of RFID in supply chain management. Journal of
Purchasing and Supply Management, 13(4), 261–273.


Tan, K. C., Kannan, V. R., Handfield, R. B., & Ghosh, S. (1999). Supply chain management:
An empirical study of its impact on performance. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, 19(10), 1034–1052.


Tao, F., Cheng, Y., Da Xu, L., Zhang, L., & Li, B. H. (2014). CCIoT-CMfg: Cloud computing
and internet of things-based cloud manufacturing service system. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, 10(2), 1435–1442.


Tao, F., Cheng, J., & Qi, Q. (2018). IIHub: An industrial internet-of-things hub toward
smart manufacturing based on cyber-physical system. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 14(5), 2271–2280.


Tao, F., Wang, Y., Zuo, Y., Yang, H., & Zhang, M. (2016). Internet of Things in product
life-cycle energy management. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 1, 26–39.


Tarafdar, M., & Qrunfleh, S. (2017). Agile supply chain strategy and supply chain per-
formance: Complementary roles of supply chain practices and information systems
capability for agility. International Journal of Production Research, 55(4), 925–938.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1515

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1520

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1525

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1530

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1540

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1545

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1550

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1555

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1560

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1565

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1570

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1575

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1575

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.01.016

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1585

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1590

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1595

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1600

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1605

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1610

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1615

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1620

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1625

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1630

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1635

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1640

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1645

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1650

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1655

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1660

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1665

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1670

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1675

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1680

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1685

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1690

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1700

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1705

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1710

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1715

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1720

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1725

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1725

https://w3.siemens.com/topics/global/de/partner-programm/branchenveranstaltungen/Documents/end-customer-forum-fub/3_TIA%20in%20DE.pdf

https://w3.siemens.com/topics/global/de/partner-programm/branchenveranstaltungen/Documents/end-customer-forum-fub/3_TIA%20in%20DE.pdf

https://w3.siemens.com/topics/global/de/partner-programm/branchenveranstaltungen/Documents/end-customer-forum-fub/3_TIA%20in%20DE.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1735

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1745

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1750

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1755

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1760

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1765

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1770

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1775

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1780

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1785

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1790

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1795

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1805

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1810

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1815

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1820

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1825

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1830

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1835

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1840

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1845

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1845




Tavana, M., Mirzagoltabar, H., Mirhedayatian, S. M., Saen, R. F., & Azadi, M. (2013). A
new network epsilon-based DEA model for supply chain performance evaluation.
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 66(2), 501–513.


Testa, F., & Iraldo, F. (2010). Shadows and lights of GSCM (Green Supply Chain
Management): Determinants and effects of these practices based on a multi-national
study. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(10), 953–962.


Theorin, A., Bengtsson, K., Provost, J., Lieder, M., Johnsson, C., Lundholm, T., &
Lennartson, B. (2017). An event-driven manufacturing information system archi-
tecture for Industry 4.0. International Journal of Production Research, 55(5),
1297–1311.


Thomas, A., & Trentesaux, D. (2013). Are intelligent manufacturing systems sustainable?
3rd workshop on service orientation in holonic and multi-agent manufacturing and ro-
botics, SOHOMA (pp. 105–114). AGIR Publishing House.


Thomson, A. M., Ramsey, S., Barnes, E., Basso, B., Eve, M., Gennet, S., ... Spevak, E.
(2017). Science in the supply chain: Collaboration opportunities for advancing sus-
tainable agriculture in the United States. Agricultural & Environmental Letters, 2(1).


Thuemmler, C., & Bai, C. (2017). Health 4.0: Application of industry 4.0 design principles
in future asthma management. Health 4.0: How virtualization and big data are re-
volutionizing healthcare (pp. 23–37). Springer International Publishing.


Tragos, E. Z., Angelakis, V., Fragkiadakis, A., Gundlegard, D., Nechifor, C. S., Oikonomou,
G., Pohls, H. C., & Gavras, A. (2014). Enabling reliable and secure IoT-based smart
city applications. Pervasive computing and communications workshops (PERCOM
Workshops), 2014 IEEE international conference on (pp. 111–116). IEEE.


Trappey, A. J., Trappey, C. V., Govindarajan, U. H., Chuang, A. C., & Sun, J. J. (2017). A
review of essential standards and patent landscapes for the Internet of Things: A key
enabler for Industry 4.0. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 33, 208–229.


Tsang, Y. P., Choy, K. L., Wu, C. H., Ho, G. T. S., Lam, C. H., & Koo, P. S. (2018). An
Internet of Things (IoT)-based risk monitoring system for managing cold supply chain
risks. Industrial Management & Data Systems.


Tseng, M. L., Lim, M. K., Wong, W. P., Chen, Y. C., & Zhan, Y. (2018). A framework for
evaluating the performance of sustainable service supply chain management under
uncertainty. International Journal of Production Economics, 195, 359–372.


Tu, M., Chung, W. H., Chiu, C. K., Chung, W., & Tzeng, Y. (2017). A novel IoT-based
dynamic carbon footprint approach to reducing uncertainties in carbon footprint
assessment of a solar PV supply chain. Industrial engineering and applications (ICIEA),
2017 4th international conference on (pp. 249–254). IEEE.


Tu, M., Lim, M. K., & Yang, M. F. (2018). IoT-based production logistics and supply chain
system – Part 1: Modeling IoT-based manufacturing supply chain. Industrial
Management & Data Systems, 118(1), 65–95.


Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., & Michahelles, F. (2011). An architectural approach to-
wards the future internet of things. Architecting the internet of things (pp. 1–24). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer.


Um, J., Lyons, A., Lam, H. K., Cheng, T. C. E., & Dominguez-Pery, C. (2017). Product
variety management and supply chain performance: A capability perspective on their
relationships and competitiveness implications. International Journal of Production
Economics, 187, 15–26.


Ung, W. A. N. G., & Kun, L. V. (2010). Research Review of Agile Supply Chain. Logistics
Technology, Z1. (z1 – page number).


Upasani, K., Bakshi, M., Pandhare, V., & Lad, B. K. (2017). Distributed maintenance
planning in manufacturing industries. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 108, 1–14.


Vachon, S. (2007). Green supply chain practices and the selection of environmental
technologies. International Journal of Production Research, 45(18–19), 4357–4379.


Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2006). Extending green practices across the supply chain:
The impact of upstream and downstream integration. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management, 26(7), 795–821.


Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2007). Supply chain management and environmental
technologies: The role of integration. International Journal of Production Research,
45(2), 401–423.


Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. D. (2008). Environmental management and manufacturing
performance: The role of collaboration in the supply chain. International Journal of
Production Economics, 111(2), 299–315.


Vachon, S., & Mao, Z. (2008). Linking supply chain strength to sustainable development:
A country-level analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15), 1552–1560.


Van Kranenburg, R. (2008). The Internet of Things: A critique of ambient technology and the
all-seeing network of RFID. Institute of Network Cultures.


Vandaie, R. (2008). The role of organizational knowledge management in successful ERP
implementation projects. Knowledge-Based Systems, 21(8), 920–926.


Varghese, A., & Tandur, D. (2014). Wireless requirements and challenges in Industry 4.0.
Contemporary computing and informatics (IC3I), 2014 international conference on (pp.
634–638). IEEE.


Vermesan, O., & Friess, P. (Eds.). (2013). Internet of things: Converging technologies for
smart environments and integrated ecosystems. River Publishers.


Vermesan, O., Friess, P., Guillemin, P., Sundmaeker, H., Eisenhauer, M., Moessner, K., ...
Cousin, P. (2013). Internet of things strategic research and innovation agenda. River
Publishers Series in Communications, 7.


Vijaykumar, S., Saravanakumar, S. G., & Balamurugan, M. (2015). Unique sense: Smart
computing prototype. Procedia Computer Science, 50, 223–228.


Viswanadham, N. (2002). The past, present, and future of supply-chain automation. IEEE
Robotics & Automation Magazine, 9(2), 48–56.


Vlacheas, P., Giaffreda, R., Stavroulaki, V., Kelaidonis, D., Foteinos, V., Poulios, G., ...
Moessner, K. (2013). Enabling smart cities through a cognitive management frame-
work for the internet of things. IEEE Communications Magazine, 51(6), 102–111.


Vogel-Heuser, B., & Hess, D. (2016). Guest editorial industry 4.0 – Prerequisites and vi-
sions. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 13(2), 411–413.


Voss, S., Sebastian, H. J., & Pahl, J. (2017). Introduction to intelligent decision support
and big data for logistics and supply chain management minitrack.


Wan, J., Cai, H., & Zhou, K. (2015). Industrie 4.0: Enabling technologies. Intelligent
computing and internet of things (ICIT), 2014 international conference on (pp. 135–140).
IEEE.


Wan, J., Tang, S., Shu, Z., Li, D., Wang, S., Imran, M., & Vasilakos, A. V. (2016). Software-
defined industrial internet of things in the context of industry 4.0. IEEE Sensors
Journal, 16(20), 7373–7380.


Wang, K. (2016). Intelligent predictive maintenance (IPdM) system–Industry 4.0 sce-
nario. WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, 113, 259–268.


Wang, P., Chaudhry, S., & Li, L. (2016). Introduction: Advances in IoT research and ap-
plications. Internet Research, 26(2).


Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E. W., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Big data analytics in
logistics and supply chain management: Certain investigations for research and ap-
plications. International Journal of Production Economics, 176, 98–110.


Wang, D., Lee, S., Zhu, Y., & Li, Y. (2017). A zero human-intervention provisioning for
industrial IoT devices. Industrial technology (ICIT), 2017 IEEE international conference
on (pp. 1271–1276). IEEE.


Wang, L., Törngren, M., & Onori, M. (2015). Current status and advancement of cyber-
physical systems in manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 37, 517–527.


Wang, Y., Wallace, S. W., Shen, B., & Choi, T. M. (2015). Service supply chain manage-
ment: A review of operational models. European Journal of Operational Research,
247(3), 685–698.


Wang, S., Wan, J., Li, D., & Zhang, C. (2016). Implementing smart factory of industrie 4.0:
An outlook. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 12(1), 3159805.


Wang, S., Wan, J., Zhang, D., Li, D., & Zhang, C. (2016). Towards smart factory for in-
dustry 4.0: A self-organized multi-agent system with big data based feedback and
coordination. Computer Networks, 101, 158–168.


Wang, X. V., & Wang, L. (2017). A cloud-based production system for information and
service integration: An internet of things case study on waste electronics. Enterprise
Information Systems, 11(7), 952–968.


Wang, J., & Yue, H. (2017). Food safety pre-warning system based on data mining for a
sustainable food supply chain. Food Control, 73, 223–229.


Wang, S., Zhang, C., Liu, C., Li, D., & Tang, H. (2017). Cloud-assisted interaction and
negotiation of industrial robots for the smart factory. Computers & Electrical
Engineering, 63, 66–78.


Wang, M., Zhang, G., Zhang, C., Zhang, J., & Li, C. (2013). An IoT-based appliance control
system for smart homes. Intelligent control and information processing (ICICIP), 2013
fourth international conference on (pp. 744–747). IEEE.


Wang, M., Zhang, R., & Zhu, X. (2017). A bi-level programming approach to the decision
problems in a vendor-buyer eco-friendly supply chain. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 105, 299–312.


Waschull, S., Bokhorst, J. A. C., & Wortmann, J. C. (2017). Impact of technology on work:
Technical functionalities that give rise to new job designs in industry 4.0. IFIP in-
ternational conference on advances in production management systems (pp. 274–281).
Cham: Springer.


Wei, J., Govindan, K., Li, Y., & Zhao, J. (2015). Pricing and collecting decisions in a
closed-loop supply chain with symmetric and asymmetric information. Computers &
Operations Research, 54, 257–265.


Wei, C., & Li, Y. (2011). Design of energy consumption monitoring and energy-saving
management system of intelligent building based on the Internet of things. Electronics,
communications and control (ICECC), 2011 international conference on (pp. 3650–
3652). IEEE.


Wei, H. L., Wang, E. T., & Ju, P. H. (2005). Understanding misalignment and cascading
change of ERP implementation: A stage view of process analysis. European Journal of
Information Systems, 14(4), 324–334.


Weyer, S., Schmitt, M., Ohmer, M., & Gorecky, D. (2015). Towards Industry 4.0-
Standardization as the crucial challenge for highly modular, multi-vendor production
systems. IFAC-Papers OnLine, 48(3), 579–584.


Wiese, A., Kellner, J., Lietke, B., Toporowski, W., & Zielke, S. (2012). Sustainability in
retailing – A summative content analysis. International Journal of Retail & Distribution
Management, 40(4), 318–335.


Willcocks, L. P., & Sykes, R. (2000). Enterprise resource planning: The role of the CIO and
it function in ERP. Communications of the ACM, 43(4), 32–38.


Williamson, O. E. (2008). Outsourcing: Transaction cost economics and supply chain
management. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 44(2), 5–16.


Wittstruck, D., & Teuteberg, F. (2011). Development and simulation of a balanced scor-
ecard for sustainable supply chain management – A system dynamics approach.
Network, 7, 368.


Wolf, J. (2011). Sustainable supply chain management integration: A qualitative analysis
of the German manufacturing industry. Journal of Business Ethics, 102(2), 221–235.


Wollschlaeger, M., Sauter, T., & Jasperneite, J. (2017). The future of industrial commu-
nication: Automation networks in the era of the internet of things and industry 4.0.
IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, 11(1), 17–27.


Wortmann, F., & Flüchter, K. (2015). Internet of things. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 57(3), 221–224.


Wu, K. J., Liao, C. J., Tseng, M. L., & Chiu, A. S. (2015). Exploring decisive factors in
green supply chain practices under uncertainty. International Journal of Production
Economics, 159, 147–157.


Wu, K. J., Liao, C. J., Tseng, M. L., Lim, M. K., Hu, J., & Tan, K. (2017). Toward sus-
tainability: Using big data to explore the decisive attributes of supply chain risks and
uncertainties. Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 663–676.


Wu, D., & Olson, D. L. (2008). Supply chain risk, simulation, and vendor selection.
International Journal of Production Economics, 114(2), 646–655.


Wu, T., Wu, F., Redouté, J. M., & Yuce, M. R. (2017). An autonomous wireless body area
network implementation towards IoT connected healthcare applications. IEEE Access,
5, 11413–11422.


Yakovleva, N., Sarkis, J., & Sloan, T. (2012). Sustainable benchmarking of supply chains:


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1850

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1855

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1860

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1865

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1870

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1875

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1880

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1885

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1890

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1895

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1900

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1905

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1910

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1915

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1925

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1930

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1930

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1935

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1940

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1945

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1950

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1955

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1955

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1960

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1965

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1970

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1975

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1980

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1980

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1985

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1990

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h1995

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2160




The case of the food industry. International Journal of Production Research, 50(5),
1297–1317.


Yan, R. (2017). Optimization approach for increasing revenue of perishable product
supply chain with the Internet of Things. Industrial Management & Data Systems,
117(4), 729–741.


Yan, B., & Huang, G. (2009). Supply chain information transmission based on RFID and
internet of things. Computing, communication, control, and management, 2009. CCCM
2009. ISECS international colloquium on, August (pp. 166–169). IEEE.


Yan, Z., Zhang, P., & Vasilakos, A. V. (2014). A survey on trust management for Internet
of Things. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 42, 120–134.


Yang, T., Fu, C., Liu, X., Pei, J., Liu, L., & Pardalos, P. M. (2018). Closed-loop supply chain
inventory management with recovery information of reusable containers. Journal of
Combinatorial Optimization, 35(1), 266–292.


Yang, F., Wu, D., Liang, L., Bi, G., & Wu, D. D. (2011). Supply chain DEA: Production
possibility set and performance evaluation model. Annals of Operations Research,
185(1), 195–211.


Yang, L., Yang, S. H., & Plotnick, L. (2013). How the internet of things technology en-
hances emergency response operations. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
80(9), 1854–1867.


Yaqoob, I., Ahmed, E., Hashem, I. A. T., Ahmed, A. I. A., Gani, A., Imran, M., & Guizani,
M. (2017). Internet of things architecture: Recent advances, taxonomy, requirements,
and open challenges. IEEE Wireless Communications, 24(3), 10–16.


Yawar, S. A., & Seuring, S. (2017). Management of social issues in supply chains: A lit-
erature review exploring social issues, actions and performance outcomes. Journal of
Business Ethics, 141(3), 621–643.


Ye, F., & Wang, Z. (2013). Effects of information technology alignment and information
sharing on supply chain operational performance. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
65(3), 370–377.


Yeh, T. M., Yang, C. C., & Lin, W. T. (2007). Service quality and ERP implementation: A
conceptual and empirical study of semiconductor-related industries in Taiwan.
Computers in Industry, 58(8), 844–854.


Youngdahl, W. E., & Loomba, A. P. (2000). Service-driven global supply chains.
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 11(4), 329–347.


Yue, X., Cai, H., Yan, H., Zou, C., & Zhou, K. (2015). Cloud-assisted industrial cyber-
physical systems: An insight. Microprocessors and Microsystems, 39(8), 1262–1270.


Zailani, S., Govindan, K., Shaharudin, M. R., & Kuan, E. E. L. (2017). Barriers to product
return management in automotive manufacturing firms in Malaysia. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 141, 22–40.


Zanella, A., Bui, N., Castellani, A., Vangelista, L., & Zorzi, M. (2014). Internet of things for
smart cities. IEEE Internet of Things journal, 1(1), 22–32.


Zarei, M., Mohammadian, A., & Ghasemi, R. (2016). Internet of things in industries: A
survey for sustainable development. International Journal of Innovation and Sustainable
Development, 10(4), 419–442.


Zeng, H., Chen, X., Xiao, X., & Zhou, Z. (2017). Institutional pressures, sustainable supply
chain management, and circular economy capability: Empirical evidence from


Chinese eco-industrial park firms. Journal of Cleaner Production, 155, 54–65.
Zhang, Y., Jiang, P., Huang, G., Qu, T., Zhou, G., & Hong, J. (2012). RFID-enabled real-


time manufacturing information tracking infrastructure for extended enterprises.
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 23(6), 2357–2366.


Zhang, L., Luo, Y., Tao, F., Li, B. H., Ren, L., Zhang, X., ... Liu, Y. (2014). Cloud manu-
facturing: A new manufacturing paradigm. Enterprise Information Systems, 8(2),
167–187.


Zhang, Y., Qian, C., Lv, J., & Liu, Y. (2017). Agent and cyber-physical system based self-
organizing and self-adaptive intelligent shopfloor. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 13(2), 737–747.


Zhang, Y., Zhao, L., & Qian, C. (2017). Modeling of an IoT-enabled supply chain for
perishable food with two-echelon supply hubs. Industrial Management & Data Systems,
117(9), 1890–1905.


Zheng, J., Simplot-Ryl, D., Bisdikian, C., & Mouftah, H. (2011). The internet of things
[Guest Editorial]. IEEE Communications Magazine, 49(11), 30–31.


Zheng, B., Yang, C., Yang, J., & Zhang, M. (2017). Pricing, collecting and contract design
in a reverse supply chain with incomplete information. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 111, 109–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.07.004.


Zhong, R. Y., Newman, S. T., Huang, G. Q., & Lan, S. (2016). Big Data for supply chain
management in the service and manufacturing sectors: Challenges, opportunities, and
future perspectives. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 101, 572–591.


Zhong, R. Y., Zhong, R. Y., Tan, K., Tan, K., Bhaskaran, G., & Bhaskaran, G. (2017). Data-
driven food supply chain management and systems. Industrial Management & Data
Systems, 117(9), 1779–1781.


Zhou, M., Fortino, G., Shen, W., Mitsugi, J., Jobin, J., & Bhattacharyya, R. (2016). Guest
editorial special section on advances and applications of Internet of Things for smart
automated systems. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 13(3),
1225–1229.


Zhou, K., Liu, T., & Zhou, L. (2015). Industry 4.0: Towards future industrial opportunities
and challenges. Fuzzy systems and knowledge discovery (FSKD) (pp. 2147–2152). IEEE.


Zhu, Q., Geng, Y., & Lai, K. H. (2011). Environmental supply chain cooperation and its
effect on the circular economy practice-performance relationship among Chinese
manufacturers. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 15(3), 405–419.


Zhu, Q., & Sarkis, J. (2004). Relationships between operational practices and perfor-
mance among early adopters of green supply chain management practices in Chinese
manufacturing enterprises. Journal of Operations Management, 22(3), 265–289.


Zhu, Q., & Sarkis, J. (2007). The moderating effects of institutional pressures on emergent
green supply chain practices and performance. International Journal of Production
Research, 45(18–19), 4333–4355.


Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., & Lai, K. H. (2013). Institutional-based antecedents and performance
outcomes of internal and external green supply chain management practices. Journal
of Purchasing and Supply Management, 19(2), 106–117.


Zuehlke, D. (2010). SmartFactory—Towards a factory-of-things. Annual Reviews in
Control, 34(1), 129–138.


E. Manavalan, K. Jayakrishna



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2195

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2250

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2265

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2265

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.07.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2300

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2305

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2310

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2315

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(18)30570-9/h2315


