









R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Transparency Built-in
Energy Consumption and Cost Estimation for Additive
Manufacturing


Martin Baumers, Chris Tuck, Ricky Wildman, Ian Ashcroft, Emma Rosamond,
and Richard Hague


Keywords:


digital supply chain
energy consumption
industrial ecology
manufacturing process
rapid manufacturing
rapid prototyping


Summary


The supply chains found in modern manufacturing are often complex and long. The re-
sulting opacity poses a significant barrier to the measurement and minimization of energy
consumption and therefore to the implementation of sustainable manufacturing. The cur-
rent article investigates whether the adoption of additive manufacturing (AM) technology
can be used to reach transparency in terms of energy and financial inputs to manufacturing
operations.


AM refers to the use of a group of electricity-driven technologies capable of combining
materials to manufacture geometrically complex products in a single digitally controlled
process step, entirely without molds, dies, or other tooling. The single-step nature affords
full measurability with respect to process energy inputs and production costs. However,
the parallel character of AM (allowing the contemporaneous production of multiple parts)
poses previously unconsidered problems in the estimation of manufacturing resource con-
sumption.


This research discusses the implementation of a tool for the estimation of process energy
flows and costs occurring in the AM technology variant direct metal laser sintering. It is
demonstrated that accurate predictions can be made for the production of a basket of
sample parts. Further, it is shown that, unlike conventional processes, the quantity and
variety of parts demanded and the resulting ability to fully utilize the available machine
capacity have an impact on process efficiency. It is also demonstrated that cost minimization
in additive manufacturing may lead to the minimization of process energy consumption,
thereby motivating sustainability improvements.


Introduction


According to data from the World Resources Institute,
industrial energy consumption, industrial processes, and trans-
portation contributed 33.3% of world greenhouse gas emissions
in 2005 (Herzog 2009). Researchers argue that the limita-
tion of carbon emissions associated with energy consumption
in manufacturing will become necessary (Jovane et al. 2008;


Address correspondence to: Martin Baumers, Wolfson School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough University, Loughborough, LE11 3TU, UK.
Email: m.baumers@lboro.ac.uk


c⃝ 2012 by Yale University
DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00512.x


Volume 17, Number 3


Westkämper et al. 2000). Predictions suggest, however, that
energy consumption occurring in industry will grow faster than
in any other sector until 2050 (Taylor 2008). Therefore it ap-
pears critical to seek new ways to reduce the energy consumed
in the mass production of goods.


A precise understanding of the emissions associated with
manufacturing processes is fundamental regarding decision
making toward sustainability. The measurement of such


418 Journal of Industrial Ecology www.wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jie


















R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


emissions forms an important area of research in the field of
industrial ecology, where a variety of methods are employed to
analyze the interactions between human activity and the en-
vironment (Gößling-Reisemann 2008). The quantification of
carbon emissions, referred to as “carbon accounting,” requires a
precise understanding of the energy flows associated with pro-
duction processes (Vijayaraghavan and Dornfeld 2010) and the
emission characteristics of the local power grid (Jeswiet and
Kara 2008).


The minimization of resource consumption during manu-
facturing is a major goal in “design for environment” method-
ologies (Telenko et al. 2008). However, the long supply chains
characterizing modern manufacturing, routinely spanning the
globe, may make recording the resource flows difficult; this leads
to the conclusion that “if you can’t measure, you can’t manage”
(Foran et al. 2005).


As discussed by Kellens and colleagues (2012), data on man-
ufacturing process productivity, energy consumption, consum-
ables usage and emissions are fundamental to the ecological
impact occurring during manufacturing. Due to the carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions associated with electric power usage
(Jeswiet and Kara 2008), the measurement of process energy
consumption forms a cornerstone in life cycle analyses of the
impact of products. Specifically, such measurements contribute
to inventory analysis, which compiles all energy and material
flows throughout the life cycle (Jiménez-González and Overcash
2000).


In the current article, the PAS2050:2011 (British Standards
Institution 2011) framework serves as an example for life cy-
cle analysis methodologies. PAS2050:2011 allows two types of
analyses: a “cradle-to-grave” assessment that surveys the ma-
jor stages occurring in a product’s life cycle, made up of raw
material generation, manufacture, distribution, use phase, and
a final disposal or recycling stage. A more limited “cradle-to-
gate” analysis focuses on the stages of raw material extraction
and manufacturing.


The term additive manufacturing (AM) refers to the use of
a collection of electricity-driven technologies capable of com-
bining materials to manufacture complex products in a single
digitally controlled process step, entirely without molds, dies, or
other tooling. As a one-stop manufacturing process, AM may
be adopted to replace traditional process chains, which are of-
ten marked by length and complexity (Tuck et al. 2007). The
current article demonstrates that where the creation of part
geometry is concentrated into a single production step, mea-
surement of the energy flows used to transform raw material
into finished (or nearly finished) components is greatly simpli-
fied. Thus the adoption of AM may also ease the measurement
of process energy consumption and carbon accounting.


The label “additive manufacturing” has been adopted to
reflect the layer-by-layer fashion in which AM machinery in-
crementally builds up products and components (see ASTM
2010). This is in contrast to the various methods of conven-
tional manufacturing, which commonly employ subtractive pro-
cesses (such as machining) that operate by removing material,
or formative techniques (such as injection molding) that give


shape to a raw material. The emergence of AM has led to new
possibilities in product design (Hague et al. 2004; Hollington
2008) and permits novel digital supply chain configurations
(Tuck et al. 2007).


A major AM technology variant used to manufacture metal
components is direct metal laser sintering (DMLS). The cur-
rent article analyzes the EOSINT M270 platform (EOS GmbH
2010), belonging to the class of DMLS technology. DMLS oper-
ates as follows: a three-dimensional representation of the prod-
uct geometry is digitally cut into discrete slices. These slices
are then transmitted to the DMLS machine, which recombines
them in a layer-by-layer sequence. To this end, the EOSINT
M270 selectively scans the surface of a metal powder bed with a
200 watt (W) fiber laser, effectively creating a thin, planar slice
of solid part geometry.1 Once the sintering of the layer is com-
plete, a fresh 0.02 millimeter (mm) increment of metal powder
(in this case stainless steel) is deposited and the sintering of the
next layer commences.2 This cycle is repeated until the build
is complete. It is important to note that the EOSINT M270
is capable of creating multiple components per build. To allow
the dissipation of thermal energy into the frame of the DMLS
machine, all produced parts are constructed onto a removable
build plate, which also forms the floor of the build volume.
Moreover, the process may require auxiliary structures for is-
land features or undercuts relative to the AM system’s vertical
axis. Commonly a wire erosion machine is used to harvest the
parts from the build plate after the build has been completed.


Comparing AM to conventional manufacturing processes,
two main advantages have been identified (Tuck et al. 2008):
first, AM may enable production without many of the con-
straints on part geometry that apply to other techniques. This
may lead to products featuring a complex geometry and to the
integration of multiple functions into single components. Sec-
ond, AM allows the manufacture of highly customized products
in small quantities at a relatively low cost. At the current state
of technology, however, the routine application of AM is still
hampered by a number of limiting factors (Ruffo and Hague
2007):


• limited material suitability,
• diminished process productivity,
• problems with dimensional accuracy,
• poor surface finish,
• repeatability issues, and
• uncompetitive production cost at medium and large vol-


umes.


In response to the technology’s current shortcomings in
terms of dimensional accuracy and surface finish, metallic AM
products are often subject to light finish machining (Cormier
et al. 2004) or shot blasting (Mazzioli et al. 2009).


While enabling complete ex post transparency of the manu-
facturing input flows, AM’s ability to produce multiple compo-
nents contemporaneously poses a number of problems for the
estimation of energy consumption and production cost (Ruffo
and Hague 2007). The novelty of the current article lies in the


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 419


















R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


provision of a combined energy consumption and cost model
that results in valid estimates for the AM process. An ability
to calculate accurate estimates of the financial cost of manu-
facturing operations is vital for process selection. Further, the
ability to accurately model the energy inputs is very valuable
in the determination of the ecological impact associated with
process energy consumption, and ultimately the environmental
footprint of products. Other nonnegligible factors shaping the
environmental impact of AM are raw material consumption
and process emissions; these further factors are not assessed in
the current article.


However, for a conclusive appraisal of the total environ-
mental impact associated with the adoption of a manufacturing
technology, all stages of the product life cycle need to be as-
sessed, ranging from raw material generation to a final recycling
or disposal stage. Therefore the results of the current study
should not be used to directly compare the environmental per-
formance of AM against other processes. Moreover, process
selection is very likely to also influence optimal design and ma-
terial specifications (Boothroyd et al. 1994). These factors also
affect the environmental performance of a product or part. The
argument against such “ceteris paribus” analyses of AM against
conventional technologies is elaborated by Baumers and col-
leagues (2011).


Material and Methods


To exploit the transparency inherent in AM as a one-stop,
electricity-driven technology, a novel tool for the combined
estimation of electric and monetary inputs is implemented. As
argued below, the treatment of AM as a parallel manufacturing
technology (Ruffo et al. 2006a) further makes the incorporation
of build volume packing functionality necessary. The discussed
approach builds on a novel, voxel-based time estimation tech-
nique providing input for an equally novel energy consumption
estimator. Finally, financial cost estimates are obtained from an
activity-based costing (ABC) framework of the type proposed by
Ruffo and colleagues (2006a). The development of an estima-
tion tool thus builds on three streams of AM-related literature:
(1) the estimation of build time for additive techniques; (2)
cost modeling, usually carried out for particular AM technol-
ogy variants; and (3) the existing work reporting on AM energy
consumption. Following a brief discussion of relevant items in
the literature, this section describes the used energy consump-
tion measurement methodology, introduces the various test ge-
ometries manufactured during a series of build experiments,
and presents the cost data collected. The implementation of
the estimation tool is discussed in a separate section.


Build Time Estimation


Commercially available rapid prototyping software packages
contain build time estimation functionality (Campbell et al.
2008), as do the machine software suites sold in bundles with
additive systems (Ruffo et al. 2006b). Offering a framework for


the classification of AM build time estimators, Di Angelo and
Di Stefano (2011) argue that the existing approaches can be
divided into “detailed-analysis” methods based on knowledge
of the inner workings of AM systems and “parametric” methods
informed by data on a set of process characteristics such as layer
thickness, hatch distance, and laser scan velocity. A body of
research exists on build time estimation for the AM technology
variant laser sintering (Choi and Samavedam 2002; Pham and
Wang 2000; Ruffo et al. 2006b). In comparison, published work
on metallic AM build time estimation is scarce. Munguia (2009)
suggests that this may be due to competitive behavior exhibited
by AM control software authors or due to idiosyncrasies in the
postprocessing of metal parts. Munguia also presents an artificial
neural network time estimation approach for metallic AM.


Additive Manufacturing Cost Modeling


Build time estimation forms the starting point for AM pro-
duction cost estimation models in the literature (Alexander
et al. 1998; Byun and Lee 2006; Campbell et al. 2008; Ruffo
et al. 2006b). Ignoring “ill-structured costs” (Son 1991) arising
from build failure, idleness, and inventory, Ruffo and colleagues
(2006a) propose an AM costing model viewing the total cost
of a build, CBuild, as the sum of all direct raw material costs and
the indirect costs (equation 1). The direct costs are obtained by
multiplying the mass of deposited material, MBuild, by the cost of
the raw material, CMaterial, measured in pounds sterling (£) per
kilogram (kg).3 The indirect costs are calculated by multiplying
the total build time, TBuild, by an indirect cost rate, ĊIndirect
(measured in £ per second):


CBuild = MBuild × CMaterial + TBuild × ĊIndirect. (1)


An estimate of cost per part, CPart, is then calculated by
dividing CBuild by the number of parts contained in the build,
nBuild. Ruffo and Hague (2007) acknowledge that this method
is only applicable to builds containing multiple instances of the
same part—a premise that is quite alien to the idea of AM being
used to flexibly build different parts in parallel.


Furthermore, Ruffo and Hague (2007) note that “in reality
manufacturers set every build with the highest packing ratio
possible,” indicating an incentive to completely fill build vol-
umes with products, potentially by selling available build vol-
ume space to external bidders. This, in turn, suggests that AM
cost models relying on deliberately unused build volume capac-
ity (e.g., Ruffo et al. 2006a) describe situations of nonminimal
cost. The convention that cost functions and models exclusively
describe configurations in which the highest possible quantity
of output is produced with the used inputs (in this case capital)
is fundamental. Configurations that satisfy this requirement are
defined as being technically efficient (Else and Curwen 1990).
With respect to the possibilities afforded by AM, it is doubtful
that models constructed by deliberately leaving capacity unused
satisfy this requirement.


420 Journal of Industrial Ecology














R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


It is interesting to note that the AM costing model pre-
sented by Hopkinson and Dickens (2003) does not fall into
the trap of describing cost relationships on the basis of unuti-
lized machine capacity. By concentrating on high-quantity AM,
in which a single design is made at maximum capacity for a
year, Hopkinson and Dickens (2003) produce cost estimates
on the basis of technical efficiency, albeit for the single prod-
uct case. Implicitly supporting the argument made above, the
cost functions shown by Hopkinson and Dickens (describing
the relationship between unit cost and production volume)
are flat, hence production cost is viewed as independent of
quantity.


Previous Work on Additive Manufacturing Energy
Consumption


Subtractive processes, such as machining, form an important
substitute technology to metallic AM. They are the subject of a
number of studies assessing the relationship between energy in-
puts and process parameters (Dietmair and Verl 2009; Kara and
Li 2011; Rajemi et al. 2010; Sarwar et al. 2009). For the anal-
ysis of electrical energy requirements of various manufacturing
processes, Gutowski and colleagues (2006) propose a general
framework using the concept of exergy. Moreover, Gutowski
and colleagues report results reached by Morrow and colleagues
(2004) on the process energy consumption of the AM technol-
ogy variant direct metal deposition (DMD).


Mognol and colleagues (2006) report the energy usage of a
now obsolete version of the DMLS system investigated in this
research, analyzing the energy inputs to single-part build ex-
periments. Reporting a mean real power consumption of 4.00
kilowatts (kW), Mognol and colleagues conclude that part ori-
entation affects total energy consumption due to the large effect
of a part’s Z-height on overall energy consumption.4 For the pro-
duction of a test part with a volume of 8.00 cubic centimeters
(cm3), the authors cite a minimum total energy consumption of
115.2 megajoules (MJ).5 Kellens and colleagues (2010) inves-
tigate the energy consumption of the Concept Laser M3 linear
selective laser melting system, which is technologically closely
related to the investigated DMLS system. For the production
of a batch of parts with a mass of 409 grams (g), a total en-
ergy consumption of 39.60 MJ is reported, which allows the
calculation of a specific energy consumption of 96.82 MJ/kg
of material deposited.6 This corresponds to the specific energy
consumption rates reported by Baumers and colleagues (2010)
for the two metallic AM technology variants electron beam
melting (EBM) and selective laser melting (SLM). Specific en-
ergy consumption of the EBM platform is measured at 61.20 MJ
while the SLM system consumes 111.60 MJ/kg of material de-
posited. Corresponding to these results, Strutt (1980) notes that
laser-based manufacturing processes may be much less energy
efficient than comparable systems utilizing an electron beam,
due to lower energy transfer efficiency.


Compared to the AM energy consumption results presented
above, the energy consumption cited by Morrow and colleagues
(2007) for the AM technology variant DMD is much greater,


where a specific energy consumption of 7708 MJ/kg of raw ma-
terial deposited is reported. Moreover, Morrow and colleagues
combine the data on DMD energy consumption with the energy
embedded in the H13 steel raw material powder, producing a
“cradle-to-gate” variant of a life cycle analysis. However, due
to the very low deposition rate setting of 0.01 grams per sec-
ond (g/s), the results reached by Morrow and colleagues appear
problematic in terms of efficient DMD technology usage.


While energy consumption estimators analogous to AM cost
estimators are not documented, one result from the AM cost
estimation literature is transferrable to energy inputs: overall
energy consumption is affected by capacity utilization (Baumers
et al. 2010). It is also likely that the mix of parts in an individual
build influences the energy efficiency of the process.


Empirical Data Used for Modeling and Validation


To provide the empirical data, a series of build experiments
was performed on the EOSINT M270 DMLS system with fac-
tory settings. This set of default operating parameters includes
the following:


• layer thickness of 0.02 mm, set in conjunction with the
used stainless steel raw material (grade 17–4 PH) in pow-
der form;


• scan path overlap of 0.5 mm;
• hatch scan strip width of 10 mm;
• contour scanning: scan speed of 700 mm/s, 60 W nominal


beam power, 40 W for downward-facing surfaces;
• outer skin scanning: scan speed of 1,000 mm/s, 195 W


nominal beam power; and
• postcontour scanning: scan speed of 1,000 mm/s, 195 W


nominal beam power.


For the energy component in life cycle inventory analyses,
the variable of interest is mean real power consumption per
measurement interval. The energy inputs during these build
experiments were recorded using a Yokogawa CW240 digital
power meter attached to the main power connection, in the
same configuration used by Baumers and colleagues (2010).
This setup takes into account the energy used to provide the ni-
trogen (N2) required to shield the process from oxygen as the N2
generator is attached to the system’s power supply. To simplify
this analysis, the impact of the used compressed air (supplied by
the local facility) is ignored. The EOSINT M270’s data sheet
(EOS GmbH 2010) suggests a nominal compressed air require-
ment of 20 cubic meters per hour (m3/h) at 7,000 hectopascals
(hPa). In total, four build experiments were undertaken.


Data Collection Experiment
The first experiment was performed to collect energy con-


sumption and build time data. To achieve this, a specifically
designed test part (shown in figure 1a) was built directly on
the build platform. To ensure sufficient data resolution, mean
real power consumption was logged in 100 millisecond (ms)
intervals.


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 421






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Figure 1 Power monitoring test part and a basket of sample parts, with dimensions in millimeters (mm).


Validation Experiments
Three further experiments were conducted to validate the


combined energy consumption and time estimator. This in-
cluded a multipart build at full machine capacity, as well as
two single-part builds to test model accuracy in single-part con-
figurations. As cumulative energy consumption values were in
the foreground in these experiments and the power meter logs
the largest number of power-related variables in this setting,
the data were recorded with a time resolution of 1 s. To pop-
ulate the workspace, emulating a realistic application of AM,
a basket of five test parts was defined (shown in figure 1b).
The composition of this basket was chosen to be repre-
sentative of the products commercially manufactured using
DMLS and to reflect variation in product size, geometry, and
application.


The energy consumed by the separation of the parts from
the removable build plate in an ancillary wire erosion process
was also monitored. The wire erosion process operates by pass-
ing an electrically charged brass wire along the surface of the
build substrate from one side of the build plate to the other.
The energy usage of the wire erosion process depends heavily
on the cutting time, which in turn depends on the length of
the interface connecting the parts to the substrate. Experiments
show that the amount of energy used in the wire erosion pro-
cess tends to be independent of part geometry and build volume
utilization. The mean real power consumption of the wire ero-


sion process is measured at 3.96 kW, which is lower than the
values observed for this technology by Gutowski and colleagues
(2006), ranging from 6.60 kW to 14.25 kW. This may be due to
the fact that the entry-level system used (an Agie Charmilles
CUT20) is comparatively small.


On the CUT20, the separation of a full build of parts from
the metal substrate is observed to take approximately 600 min-
utes (36,000 s). Thus, for each build, the energy investment for
the wire erosion process is assumed to be constant at 142.46
MJ. The estimator applies this amount of energy consumption
to the energy consumption estimate of every build, irrespec-
tive of build configuration. Moreover, the wire erosion process
for full builds and single-part builds is thus treated identically,
which may be a further simplification. Please note, however,
that this element of energy consumption is not included for the
validation of the estimator.


Cost Data
Cost estimation is based on a combination of data published


by Ruffo and colleagues (2006a) and expenditure data provided
by the EOSINT M270 machine operator, Bentley Motors, in
Crewe (UK). For consistency, all cost data are reported in 2010
pounds sterling (£), and have been converted where necessary.
Table 1 presents the data informing the cost model specified for
the EOSINT M270, including the cost arising from the ancillary
wire erosion process.


422 Journal of Industrial Ecology






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Table 1 Direct and indirect cost elements (adapted from Ruffo et al. 2006a)


Cost elements Cost elements (cont.)


Production overhead Equipment
Rent, building area cost 4.53 £/h AM equipment and wire eroder 8.00 years


Hardware and software 5.00 years
Administration overhead
Hardware purchase 1,670.27 £ Machine costs
Software purchase 1,670.27 £ Machine purchase 364,406.80 £
Hardware cost/year 334.05 £ Machine purchase cost per year 45,550.85 £
Software cost/year 334.05 £ Maintenance cost per year 22,033.90 £
Consumables per year 1,113.52 £ Machine consumables per year 2,542.37 £
Total administration overhead 0.31 £/h Wire erosion machine purchase 55,000.00 £


Total wire erosion costs per year 8,165.00 £
Production labor Total machine costs per year 78,292.12 £
Technician annual salary 25,165.45 £ Total machine costs 15.66 £/h
Employer contributions 22.00 %
Total production labor 6.14 £/h


Utilization Total indirect costs per machine hour 26.64 £
Utilization rate 57.04 % Direct cost for 17-4 PH powder/kg 78.81 £
Annual machine operating hours 5,000.00 h Direct electricity costs per MJ 0.018 £


Notes: £ = 2010 pounds sterling; h = hours; kg = kilograms; MJ = megajoules.


Implementation


To allow full flexibility and portability, the combined energy
and cost estimation tool, including all subordinate functions
such as workspace configuration and build time estimation, is
implemented in C++ as a console application. The imple-
mentation was written using the free integrated development
environment Dev-C++ (version 4.9.9.2).


Additive Manufacturing Build Volume Packing


While the cost model presented by Ruffo and colleagues
(2006a) appears very useful for capital-heavy production
processes such as AM, the requirement for technical effi-
ciency implies that the available capacity should be fully
utilized in the estimation of AM production cost. This
problem is solved by including build volume packing func-
tionality in the estimation tool, thereby producing accept-
able build configurations from the basket of parts shown in
figure 1b, ideally exhibiting a maximum level of capacity
utilization.


Workspace packing approaches have been discussed in the
literature in an effort to make AM more economical by automat-
ing this activity (Hur et al. 2001; Nyaluke et al. 1996). In the
determination of packing strategies, part placement is usually
determined by some optimization technique (Hur et al. 2001;
Ikonen et al. 1997; Wodziak et al. 1994). For an efficient pack-
ing outcome, Hur and colleagues (2001) suggest using voxel
approximations of part geometry to determine part placement
and orientation, allowing nested configurations of parts in the
build volume. To balance the performance of the build volume
packing algorithm with resources available for its development,
two decisions were made before developing the algorithm:


1. To achieve an efficient packing result, the algorithm was
based upon rough voxel representations of the test parts
(with a resolution of 5 mm). This effectively discretizes
the problem of placing irregular and continuous geome-
tries.


2. To allow the definition of different demand profiles faced
by the AM user, the parts are inserted into the build vol-
ume in a fixed sequence that is determined exogenously.
The algorithm ensures that at least one instance of each
demanded part is included in the build volume.


The next step in the design of the packing algorithm is
the selection of an evaluation criterion that is suitable for the
wide range of different geometries and part sizes exhibited by
the basket of test parts. The resulting implementation moves
and rotates inserted parts such that centers of mass are as close
together as possible, thereby producing a densely packed build
configuration.


Due to the application of this approach to DMLS, where
all parts are constructed on the base plate, part movement is
limited to the x–y plane. Further, to facilitate the voxel rep-
resentation of the parts and to avoid problems of anisotropic
material properties occurring in metallic AM, part rotation is
constrained to the vertical axis in discrete 90◦ steps.


Demand Profile Definition


An intertemporal production scheduling decision will usu-
ally mean that total demand for parts exceeds machine capacity
available at a given point in time. This is modeled by allow-
ing the total demand for parts to exceed available machine
capacity, which may be interpreted as demand extending into
the future. The construction of an energy and cost estimator


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 423






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


allowing for such excess demand in the multiproduct case can
be facilitated by the definition of some order of precedence for
k different parts. This can be interpreted as a measure of com-
parative urgency of the production of individual components.
In a situation of demand exceeding the available capacity, this
precedence order is likely to govern the composition of a build.
Thus the demand profile faced by the AM user in this specifi-
cation contains two elements: first, the demand level for each
of the k parts, and second, an indication of the order of prece-
dence. The instantaneous demand level measured in integer
units for each of the k parts can be expressed as a k element
vector dd, where d di ∈ N,


dd = [d d1 d d2 · · · d dk−1 d dk ]. (2)


The assignment of an order of precedence to each of the k
parts results in a vector p with k elements, where {pi ∈ N|0 <
pi ≤ k} and pi ̸= p j :


p = [pi p2 · · · pk−1 pk ]. (3)


Build Time Estimation


Once the build configuration is determined by executing
the build volume packing algorithm, the next step is to esti-
mate build time, which forms a prerequisite for cost estimation
(Munguia 2009; Ruffo et al. 2006b). The estimate for total build
time, TBuild, is obtained by combining data from a hierarchy of
elements of time consumption:


• fixed time consumption per build operation, TJob, includ-
ing, for example, machine atmosphere generation and
machine warm-up;


• total layer dependent time consumption, obtained by
multiplying the fixed time consumption per layer, TLayer,
by the total number of build layers l;


• the total build time needed for the deposition of part
geometry approximated by the voxels. The triple ! op-
erator in equation (4) is used to express the summa-
tion of the time needed to process each voxel, TVoxel xyz,
in a three-dimensional array representing the discretized
build configuration:


TBuild = Tjob + (TLayer × l ) +
z!


z=1


y!


y=1


x!


x=1
TVoxel xyz . (4)


No allowance is made for build preparation and machine
cleaning. It is felt that the time spent on these activities is
difficult to measure and very much at the discretion of the
machine operator. It could be argued that these activities take
place during the 42.96% of nonoperational hours (as shown in
table 1).


In the commercial setting surveyed, the EOSINT M270 is
kept in a standby state when idle, except during holidays or


maintenance, when it is switched off completely. In this standby
state, the N2 supply is shut down, with only the laser chiller,
the control computer, and some secondary functions active.
However, this configuration does not reflect energy-conscious
technology usage. For energy consumption minimization, the
system should be deactivated completely or as far as possible
during inactive periods, perhaps through the addition of an
energy-saving mode.


Energy Consumption Estimation


Total energy investment, EBuild, can be modeled similarly
to equation (4). However, a purely time-dependent element
of power consumption must be expected in the continuous
operation of the AM machine. This is denoted by the energy
consumption rate ĖTime (measured in MJ/s), which is multiplied
by TBuild to estimate total time-dependent energy consumption.
Modeling ĖTime as a constant reflects its interpretation as a mean
baseline level of energy consumption throughout the build,
originating from continuously operating machine components
such as cooling fans, pumps, and the control system.


EJob contains all energy consumption attributable to the
build job, including energy consumed by the wire erosion pro-
cess to remove the parts from the build plate. Analogous to build
time estimation, ELayer denotes fixed elements of energy con-
sumption per build and layer, for a total number of layers, l. Fur-
ther, the geometry-dependent energy consumption is obtained
by adding all energy consumption associated with voxel depo-
sition, EVoxel xyz, throughout the discretized workspace. Please
note that EVoxel xyz does not contain time-dependent power con-
sumption. The empirical data on EVoxel xyz were obtained by
monitoring machine energy consumption during scanning and
then subtracting the energy associated with the energy con-
sumption rate ĖTime. Thus EBuild can be modeled as follows:


EBuild = EJob + (ĖTime × TBuild) + (ELayer × l )


+
z!


z=1


y!


y=1


x!


x=1
EVoxel xyz . (5)


This energy consumption model should not be interpreted as
showing how total AM energy consumption can be attributed
to individual subunits of the platform. The specification was
chosen to implement a voxel-based energy consumption esti-
mator. Moreover, both the time and energy estimation imple-
mentations possess additional information on the real Z-height
of the parts contained in the build. This approach is chosen to
avoid large estimation errors arising from the inclusion of empty
layers.


Cost Estimation


For the current research, an activity-based cost (ABC) es-
timator of the type devised by Ruffo and colleagues (2006a)
is employed. The cost estimate for the build, CBuild, is con-
structed by combining data on the total indirect costs and


424 Journal of Industrial Ecology






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


direct costs incurred, thereby providing a measure of “relatively
well-structured” costs (Son 1991) ignoring costs arising from
risk of failure, setup, waiting, idleness, and inventory. Indirect
costs, expressed as a cost rate, ĊIndirect, measured per machine
hour, contain costs arising from administrative and production
overheads, production labor, as well as machine costs (includ-
ing depreciation). As listed in table 1, the current research
estimates the total indirect cost rate of operating the EOSINT
M270 at £26.64 per hour. It is noteworthy that the system incor-
porates an N2 generator, hence no protective gas from external
sources is needed.


Unlike in the work by Ruffo and colleagues (2006a), two
direct costs enter the total cost estimates: raw material costs
and energy costs. Total raw material costs are calculated by
multiplying the total weight w of all parts included in the build
(including support structures) with the price per kilogram of
the stainless steel 17-4 PH powder, PriceRaw material (£78.81/kg).
The expenditure for energy enters the model by multiplication
of the energy consumption estimate, EBuild, with the mean price
of electricity for the manufacturing sector in the UK, PriceEnergy,
currently around £0.018/MJ (according to DECC 2010). Thus
the total cost estimate for the build, CBuild, can be expressed as


CBuild = (ĊIndirect × TBuild) + (w × Pr i ceRaw material)


+ (EBuild × Pr i ceEnergy). (6)


Results


Performance of the Build Volume Packing Algorithm


A full-capacity build experiment was designed by executing
the build volume packing algorithm with excess demand dd
for all parts. In the configuration maintained throughout the
current article, the precedence vector p is ordered according
to part size. Thus the first entry in p is the largest part, the
bearing block, and the fifth entry is the smallest part in the
basket, the venturi pipe (as shown in figure 1b). The resulting
full build configuration is shown in figure 2. Of the available
2,025 build volume floor voxels, 92.6% were occupied. A total
of 85 parts were inserted, thus utilizing 19.78% of the used
build volume cuboid (225 mm × 225 mm × 52 mm). This
value includes the auxiliary structures needed to dissipate heat
from the overhanging part geometry.


Model Specification


The final specifications of the time and energy estimators are
obtained from a least squares regression of the time and energy
consumption data recorded during the deposition of each layer
of the power monitoring test part, using the area scanned per
layer as the independent variable. As shown in figure 1a, the
power monitoring part is of layered design, resulting in the
four different time and energy consumption levels shown in
figure 3.


Figure 2 Full build configuration, with dimensions in millimeters
(mm).


The obtained intercept parameters αTime (10.82 s) and
αEnergy (0.008 MJ) are multiplied by the number of layers in
the build l in order to obtain layer-dependent time and energy
consumption. The slope parameters expressing the time and
energy attributable to the scanning of 1 mm2 during the build,
βTime (0.0125 s) and βEnergy (0.000013 MJ), are then used in
conjunction with the layer thickness lt (0.02 mm) and a mea-
sure of occupancy of each voxel to calculate total time and
energy consumption per voxel, TVoxel xyz and EVoxel xyz, respec-
tively. The rate of occupancy (ROi) in each voxel depends on
the ratio of the volume of part i occupying this voxel (VPi) and
the volume of the voxel approximation for part i (VAi):


ROi =
VPi
VAi


. (7)


Thus, for each (5 mm)3 voxel in the position xyz holding
250 (= 5 mm/lt) layers and containing part i, the build time and
energy consumption can be approximated:


TVoxel xyz = βTime × 52 ×
5
l t


× ROi (8)


EVoxel xyz = βEnergy × 52 ×
5
l t


× ROi . (9)


This is combined with an estimated fixed time and energy
consumption for machine startup, TJob (63 s) and EJob (142.58
MJ, including wire erosion). The startup process is very rapid
on this system, as no system warm-up is required and the build
chamber is continuously flooded with N2 during build activity.
It should be noted that EBuild also contains the time-dependent
power consumption, obtained by multiplying the baseline en-
ergy consumption rate ĖTime (0.0015 MJ/s) by TBuild. The


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 425






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Figure 3 Regressing cross-section area against time and energy consumption, with dimensions in millimeters (mm), time in seconds (s),
and energy in megajoules (MJ).


estimates of TBuild and EBuild are obtained as follows:


TBuild = TJob + (αTime × l ) +
z!


z=1


y!


y=1


x!


x=1
TVoxel xyz (10)


EBuild = EJob + (ĖTime × TBuild) + (αEnergy × l )


+
z!


z=1


y!


y=1


x!


x=1
EVoxel xyz . (11)


Validation of the Model


The time and energy consumption model specified in equa-
tions (10) and (11) can be validated by comparing the calcu-
lated estimates to the real time and energy consumption during
three build experiments. Validation is performed for the full
build at maximum machine capacity (shown in figure 2) and
two builds of single components from the basket of sample parts,
the bearing block and the turbine wheel. The results of the val-
idation experiments and the corresponding estimates of TBuild
and EBuild are presented in table 2. Note that the validation does


426 Journal of Industrial Ecology






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Table 2 Confronting the estimates with experimental results


Experiment Time consumed Model time estimate, TBuild Error Energy usage Model energy estimate, EBuild Error


Full build experiment 388,031 s 354,806 s −8.56% 917.10 MJ 879.93 MJ −4.05%
Single bearing block 93,302 s 92,338 s −1.03% 215.48 MJ 223.13 MJ 3.55%
Single turbine wheel 31,224 s 28,504 s −8.71% 72.73 MJ 66.80 MJ −8.15%


Notes: s = seconds; MJ = megajoules.


not include the energy consumed by the ancillary wire erosion
process, as the emphasis of this study is the core AM process.
It should also be mentioned that some of the venturi parts had
an incorrect orientation during the build, which, together with
a design flaw, led to build failure for the affected parts in the
final stages of the build. However, this was deemed to have had
a negligible effect on the presented results.


The observed errors are likely to originate from the use of an
idealized test part (figure 1) in the experiments that provided
the data. Compared to other build time estimators (Campbell et
al. 2008; Munguia 2009; Ruffo et al. 2006b; Wilson 2006), the
mean absolute errors show that the developed time estimation
functionality performs robustly.


Process Economics of the Full Build Experiment


The transparency characteristic of one-stop processes such
as AM can be demonstrated on the basis of the full build ex-
periment (as shown in figure 2). According to the experimen-
tal data (including the wire erosion process), the build con-
sumed a total of 1059.56 MJ of energy. Using the specified
cost model, CBuild is estimated at £3,218.87. Individual part
shares of cost and energy usage are identified through their
share of total product mass, which includes any support struc-
tures connecting the parts to the substrate (4.167 kg). Figure 4
thus shows the process energy consumption and production cost
attributable to each part.


Discussion


The average cost functions for AM products proposed by
Ruffo and colleagues (2006a) are downward sloping and sta-
bilize asymptotically for large production quantities, suggesting
that part quantity is a determinant of the process efficiency
of AM. The current article argues that such considerations do
not correspond to AM technology usage in practice, which is
marked by AM users trying to operate their machinery as effi-
ciently as possible by packing as many parts as possible into each
build. Moreover, AM is used in a parallel mode of production
that mixes multiple parts in varying quantities in each build.
So if production quantity is not a useful determinant of AM
production efficiency, what is?


The current article instead argues that the demand profile
faced by the AM user has a significant impact. The combined
energy consumption and cost estimator can be used to test the
effect of different demand profiles. Table 3 lists eight such spec-
ifications, which are then used for cost and energy consumption


estimation. The different demand profiles enter the estimator
through the instantaneous demand vector dd. Note that de-
mand for a particular part is allowed to exceed the available
build volume capacity, and hence also exceeds the real number
of parts that can be produced in one build (reported in brackets).


The concepts of full capacity utilization and technical ef-
ficiency are related, so this research takes the standpoint that
technically efficient operation of the DMLS machinery does
not imply the full exhaustion of the build volume capacity,
which is an idealized situation that does not normally occur in
practice. Rather, the position is taken that the nonexhaustion
of the demand faced by the AM user signals technically efficient
machine operation. Following this, the demand profiles A, B,
C, E, F, and G satisfy the criterion. Moreover, table 3 lists the
fraction of the build volume floor voxels that are occupied. It
is noteworthy that for the builds deemed to be technically ef-
ficient, this fraction ranges from 50.07% (profile E) to 97.53%
(profile G).


A possible criticism of this methodology is that by letting the
packing algorithm select parts, the composition of the demand
profile changes, eventually leading to a mismatch with what is
demanded by the user. However, the presented model, based on
the instantaneous demand profile dd, aims to reflect the situa-
tion at a particular point in time. Adding a temporal dimension
would improve realism, but would also greatly increase model
complexity.


By cumulating the total part volume resulting from each of
the eight demand profiles, summary metrics (per cubic centime-
ter) of comparative process efficiency are derived, as shown in
figure 5.


Demand profiles A through D reflect situations of uniform
demand, in which the number demanded of each type is equal
(see table 3). Demand profiles E through G demonstrate how
changes to the mix of parts in the build volume affect production
cost, even if the criterion of technical efficiency is satisfied.
The main insight won from the demand profiles A, B, and C
is that production quantity is only an indirect determinant of
manufacturing costs and energy consumption. Ruffo and Hague
(2007) argue that increases in production quantity diminish
the average cost by enlarging the allocation base for the total
cost of the build. In contrast, this work argues that not unused
capacity, but the ability of the AM user to fill the available build
volumes drives manufacturing costs.


The results for the other three demand profiles leading to
technically efficient builds—E, F, and G—show that changes
in the part mix create an unpredictable effect on the effi-
ciency of the investigated AM process. It appears that some part


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 427






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Figure 4 Process energy consumption and cost by part, with costs in pounds sterling (£) and energy in megajoules (MJ).


mixes will idiosyncratically lead to more efficient builds than
others.


In terms of energy consumption, specification A is the most
efficient, despite profile G exhibiting a higher build volume
voxel utilization metric (97.53%, table 3). Though not by a wide
margin, profile A is also the most cost-effective configuration
(570.69 pence/cm3 versus 571.15 pence/cm3 in profile F). This
indicates that builds with a wide variety of parts are likely to
lead to improved process economics through the AM user’s
increased ability to compose builds freely.


Conclusion


The current research has shown that the one-stop nature of
AM can make the monetary and energy flows during the produc-


tion of complex components strikingly transparent. Thus the
adoption of AM also simplifies measurement of the manufac-
turing energy consumption for life cycle inventory assessments.


Problems arising from AM’s parallel nature in the estimation
of manufacturing energy consumption and costs have also been
discussed, demonstrating that the implementation of an estima-
tion tool that is in harmony with the requirement of efficient
technology utilization is viable. As the motivation to measure
and reduce energy inputs to production processes is increasing
with energy prices (Herrmann and Thiede 2009), this is seen as
a very relevant result for potential AM technology adopters.


In many traditional supply chains, where reliable estimates of
cumulative energy consumption may be unavailable, the adop-
tion of AM allows producers to provide their customers with


Table 3 Different demand profiles and realized part quantities


Quantity of parts demanded


Demand
profile Bearing block


Turbine
wheel Belt link End cap Venturi


Build volume floor area
occupation (voxels) Description


A ∞ (2) ∞ (5) ∞ (8) ∞ (1) ∞ (69) 92.59% Uniform demand,
excess


B 5 (2) 5 (5) 5 (5) 5 (4) 5 (5) 79.80% Uniform demand,
high


C 3 (2) 3 (3) 3 (3) 3 (3) 3 (3) 62.27% Uniform demand,
intermediate


D 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (1) 26.32% Uniform demand,
low


E ∞ (3) — — — — 50.07% Excess demand,
largest part


F — ∞ (10) ∞ (13) — — 82.37% Excess demand,
medium parts


G — — — ∞ (45) ∞ (100) 97.53% Excess demand,
small parts


H 1 (1) — — — — 16.69% Single-part build,
bearing block


Notes: Values in parentheses show the actual number of parts inserted by the build volume packing algorithm. ∞ = infinity.


428 Journal of Industrial Ecology






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Figure 5 Effect of demand scenario on estimated energy consumption and cost, with dimensions in centimeters (cm), cost in pounds
sterling (£), and energy in megajoules (MJ).


reliable data on the energy embedded into products or com-
ponents during the manufacturing stage. Efforts to reduce the
total energy associated with manufacturing using a methodol-
ogy of “design for energy minimization” are greatly aided by
such transparency.


It has been shown that selecting the minimum cost con-
figuration in AM is likely to lead to the secondary effect of
minimizing process energy consumption. Hence, from an eco-
logical standpoint, AM adoption may come with the side effect
of correcting production configurations featuring non-minimal
energy inputs. This aspect may be an important prerequisite


for energy efficiency gains in manufacturing (see Lovins 1996).
In this context it is important to note that for machining pro-
cesses (which form an important substitute technology to AM)
the cost-minimizing configuration does not necessarily lead to
energy consumption minimization (Rajemi et al. 2010).


The corrective described by Lovins is perhaps also a hallmark
of a particular class of technology described as “Mumfordian
biotechnics.” It has been argued that these technologies may
in the future replace conventional mass production by a more
benign, scalable, and product performance–oriented manufac-
turing approach (Mumford 1971). Aspects of AM that support


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 429






R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


this classification are the qualitative richness of products en-
abled by AM (Hollington 2008) and the freedom from quanti-
tative pressures associated with the absence of sunk tooling costs
present in traditional mass production (Ruffo et al. 2006a).


For a comparison of the environmental impact of AM with
those of other manufacturing processes, this article has argued
that the impact of manufacturing process choice should not be
considered in isolation. It is necessary to explore matching de-
sign changes and material selection. These variations are more
than likely to impact the environmental performance through-
out the life cycle, especially during the use phase. Further re-
search is needed in this area, perhaps in the form of detailed life
cycle case studies with combined variation of manufacturing
process, design, and material.


Acknowledgements


The authors greatly acknowledge the support given by
the technical staff—Roy Darlington, Tony Galley, and Tim
Bloor—at the Crewe (UK) facility of Bentley Motors Ltd. Fur-
ther, the authors greatly acknowledge the support given by
Mark Hardy at the Additive Manufacturing Research Group at
Loughborough University.


Notes


1. One watt (W, SI) ≈ 3.412 British Thermal Units (BTU)/hour ≈
1.341 × 10−3 horsepower (HP).


2. One millimeter (mm) = 10−3 meters (m, SI) ≈ 0.039 inches.
3. One kilogram (kg, SI) ≈ 2.204 pounds (lb).
4. One kilowatt (kW) ≈ 56.91 British thermal units (BTU)/minute ≈


1.341 horsepower (HP).
5. One cubic centimeter (cm3) = 10−6 cubic meters (m3, SI) ≈ 0.0610


cubic inches (in.3). One megajoule (MJ) = 106 joules (J, SI) ≈ 239
kilocalories (kcal) ≈ 948 British thermal units (BTU).


6. One gram (g) = 10−3 kilograms (kg, SI) ≈ 0.035 ounces (oz).


References


Alexander, P., S. Allen, and D. Dutta. 1998. Part orientation and
build cost determination in layered manufacturing. Computer-
Aided Design 30(5): 343–356.


ASTM. 2010. ASTM F2792 – 10e1 standard terminology for
additive manufacturing technologies. www.astm.org/Standards/
F2792.htm. Accessed 4 October 2010.


Baumers, M., C. Tuck, R. Hague, I. Ashcroft and R. Wildman. 2010. A
comparative study of metallic additive manufacturing power con-
sumption. Paper presented at the 2010 Solid Freeform Fabrication
Symposium, 9–11 August, Austin, TX, USA.


Baumers, M., C. Tuck, and R. Hague. 2011. Realised levels of geomet-
ric complexity in additive manufacturing. International Journal of
Product Development 13(3): 185–203.


Boothroyd, G., P. Dewhurst and W. Knight. 1994. Product design for
manufacture and assembly. New York, NY, USA: Marcel Dekker.


British Standards Institution. 2011. Guide to PAS2050:2011.
www.bsigroup.com/en/Standards-and-Publications/Industry-Sec-
tors/Energy/PAS-2050. Accessed 15 May 2012.


Byun, H. and K. H. Lee. 2006. Determination of the optimal build direc-
tion for different rapid prototyping processes using multi-criterion
decision making. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing
22(1): 69–80.


Campbell, I., J. Combrinck, D. De Beer, and L. Barnard. 2008. Stere-
olithography build time estimation based on volumetric calcula-
tions. Rapid Prototyping Journal 14(5): 271–279.


Choi, S. H. and S. Samavedam. 2002. Modelling and optimisation of
rapid prototyping. Computers in Industry 47(1): 39–53.


Cormier, D., H. West, O. Harryson, and K. Knowlson. 2004. Character-
ization of thin walled Ti-6Al-4V components produced via elec-
tron beam melting. Paper presented at the 2004 Solid Freeform
Fabrication Symposium, 2–4 August, Austin, TX, USA.


DECC (Department of Energy and Climate Change). 2010.
Quarterly energy prices, December 2010. www.decc.gov.uk/
assets/decc/Statistics/publications/prices/1085-qepdec10.pdf. Ac-
cessed 10 May 2011.


Di Angelo, L. and P. Di Stefano. 2011. A neural network-based build
time estimator for layer manufactured objects. International Journal
of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 57(1): 215–224.


Dietmair, A. and A. Verl. 2009. Energy consumption forecasting and
optimization for tool machines. MM Science Journal March: 62–
66.


Else, P. and P. Curwen. 1990. Principles of microeconomics. London, UK:
Unwin Hyman.


EOS GmbH. 2010. Products. www.eos.info/en/products.html. Ac-
cessed 24 September 2010.


Foran, B., M. Lenzen, C. Dey, and M. Bilek. 2005. Integrating sus-
tainable chain management with triple bottom line accounting.
Ecological Economics 52(2): 143–157.


Gößling-Reisemann, S. 2008. What is resource consumption and how
can it be measured? Theoretical considerations. Journal of Indus-
trial Ecology 12(1): 10–25.


Gutowski, T., J., Dahmus, and A. Thiriez. 2006. Electrical energy re-
quirements for manufacturing processes. Paper presented at the
13th CIRP International Conference on Life Cycle Engineering,
31 May–2 June, Leuven, Belgium.


Hague, R., S. Mansour, and N. Saleh. 2004. Material and design consid-
erations for rapid manufacturing. International Journal of Production
Research 42(22): 4691–4708.


Herrmann, C. and S. Thiede. 2009. Process chain simulation to foster
energy efficiency in manufacturing. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing
Science and Technology 1(4): 221–229.


Herzog, T. 2009. World greenhouse gas emissions in 2005. http://
pdf.wri.org/working_papers/world_greenhouse_gas_emissions_
2005.pdf/. Accessed 15 July 2011.


Hollington, G. 2008. Design 2.0. www.tctmagazine.com/library/
115/Design%202.0.pdf. Accessed 18 May 2011.


Hopkinson, N. and P. Dickens. 2003. Analysis of rapid
manufacturing—Using layer manufacturing processes for produc-
tion. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C:
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 217(1): 31–39.


Hur, S., K. Choi, S. Lee, and P. Chang, 2001. Determination of fabri-
cating orientation and packing in SLS process. Journal of Materials
Processing Technology 112(1): 236–243.


Ikonen, I., W. E. Biles, A. Kumar, R. K. Ragade, and J. C. Wissel. 1997.
A genetic algorithm for packing three-dimensional non-convex
objects having cavities and holes. Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Genetic Algorithms: Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, July 19–23. Waltham, MA, USA: Morgan Kauf-
mann, 591–598.


430 Journal of Industrial Ecology







http://www.eos.info/en/products.html




R E S E A R C H A N D A N A LYS I S


Jeswiet, J. and S. Kara. 2008. Carbon emissions and CESTM in
manufacturing. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Technology 57(1):
17–20.


Jiménez-González, C. and M. Overcash. 2000. Energy sub-modules
applied in life-cycle inventory of processes. Clean Products and
Processes 2(1): 57–66.


Jovane, F., H. Yoshikawa, L. Alting, C. R. Boër, E. Westkämper, D.
Williams, M. Tseng, G. Seliger, and A. M. Paci. 2008. The incom-
ing global technological and industrial revolution towards com-
petitive sustainable manufacturing. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing
Technology 57(2): 641–659.


Kara, S. and W. Li. 2011. Unit process energy consumption models for
material removal processes. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Tech-
nology 60: 37–40.


Kellens, K., W. Dewulf, M. Overcash, M. Hauschild, and J. R. Du-
flou. 2012. Methodology for systematic analysis and improvement
of manufacturing unit process life cycle inventory (UPLCI)—
CO2PE! initiative (cooperative effort on process emissions in
manufacturing). Part 1: Methodology description. International
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 17: 69–78.


Kellens, K., E. Yasa, W. Dewulf, and J. R. Duflou. 2010. Environmental
assessment of selective laser melting and selective laser sintering.
Paper presented at Going Green – CARE INNOVATION 2010:
From Legal Compliance to Energy-efficient Products and Services,
8–11 November, Vienna, Austria.


Lovins, A. B. 1996. Negawatts—Twelve transitions, eight improve-
ments and one distraction. Energy Policy 24(4): 331–343.


Mazzioli, A., M. Germani, and R. Raffaeli. 2009. Direct fabrication
through electron beam melting technology of custom cranial im-
plants designed in a PHANToM-based haptic environment. Ma-
terials and Design 30(8): 3186–3192.


Mognol, P., D. Lepicart, and N. Perry. 2006. Rapid prototyping: Energy
and environment in the spotlight. Rapid Prototyping Journal 12(1):
26–34.


Morrow, W. R., H. Qi, I. Kim, J. Mazumder, and S. J. Skerlos. 2007.
Environmental aspects of laser-based and conventional tool and
die manufacturing. Journal of Cleaner Production 15(10): 932–
943.


Morrow, W. R., H. Qi, I. Kim, J. Mazumder, and S. J. Skerlos. 2004.
Laser-based and conventional tool and die manufacturing: Com-
parison of environmental aspects. Proceedings of the Global Confer-
ence on Sustainable Product Development and Life Cycle Engineering,
29 September–1 October, Berlin, Germany, 103–110.


Mumford, L. 1971. The myth of the machine—The Pentagon of power.
London, UK: Secker & Warburg.


Munguia, F. J. 2009. RMADS: Development of a concurrent rapid man-
ufacturing advice system. Ph.D. thesis, Universitat Politecnica de
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.


Nyaluke, A., B. Nasser, H. R. Leep, and H. R. Parsaei. 1996. Rapid
prototyping work space optimization. Computers & Industrial En-
gineering 31(1/2): 103–106.


Pham, D. T. and X. Wang. 2000. Prediction and reduction of build
times for the selective laser sintering process. Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part B 214: 425–430.


Rajemi, M. F., P. T. Mativenga, and A. Aramcharoen. 2010. Sustain-
able machining: Selection of optimum turning conditions based
on minimum energy considerations. Journal of Cleaner Production
18(10–11): 1059–1065.


Ruffo, M. and R. Hague. 2007. Cost estimation for rapid
manufacturing—Simultaneous production of mixed components
using laser sintering. Proceedings of IMech E Part B: Journal of
Engineering Manufacture 221(11): 1585–1591.


Ruffo, M., C. Tuck, and R. Hague. 2006a. Cost estimation for rapid
manufacturing—Laser sintering production for low to medium
volumes. Proceedings of IMech E Part B: Journal of Engineering
Manufacture 220(9): 1417–1427.


Ruffo, M., C. Tuck, and R. Hague. 2006b. Empirical laser sintering
time estimator for Duraform PA. International Journal of Production
Research 44(23): 5131–5146.


Sarwar, M., M. Persson, H. Hellbergh, and J. Haider. 2009. Measure-
ment of specific cutting energy for evaluating the efficiency of
bandsawing different workpiece materials. International Journal of
Machine Tools and Manufacture 49: 958–965.


Son, Y. K. 1991. A cost estimation model for advanced manufacturing
systems. International Journal of Production Research 29(3): 441–
452.


Strutt, P. R. 1980. A comparative study of electron beam and laser
melting of M2 tool steel. Materials Science and Engineering 44(1):
239–250.


Taylor, P. 2008. Energy technology perspectives 2008—Scenarios and
strategies to 2050. Paper presented at the Institute of Energy
Economics Workshop, 7 July, Tokyo, Japan.


Telenko, C., C. C. Seepersad, and M. E. Webber. 2008. A compila-
tion of design for environment principles and guidelines. Paper
presented at the ASME 2008 International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engi-
neering Conference, 3–6 August, New York, NY, USA.


Tuck, C., R. Hague, and N. Burns. 2007. Rapid manufacturing: impact
on supply chain methodologies and practise. International Journal
of Services and Operations Management 3(1): 1–22.


Tuck, C., R. Hague, M. Ruffo, M. Ransley, and P. Adams. 2008. Rapid
manufacturing facilitated customization. International Journal of
Computer Integrated Manufacturing 21(3): 245–258.


Vijayaraghavan, A. and D. Dornfeld. 2010. Automated energy moni-
toring of machine tools. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Technology
59(1): 21–24.


Westkämper, E., L. Alting, and G. Arndt. 2000. Life cycle management
and assessment: Approaches and visions towards sustainable man-
ufacturing (keynote paper). CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Tech-
nology 49(2): 501–526.


Wilson, J. O. 2006. Selection for rapid manufacturing under epistemic
uncertainty. Master’s thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, At-
lanta, GA, USA.


Wodziak, J. R., G. M. Fadel, and C. Kirschman. 1994. A genetic algo-
rithm for optimizing multiple part placement to reduce build time.
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Rapid Prototyping:
201–210. University of Dayton Research Institute, Dayton, OH.


About the Authors


Martin Baumers is a doctoral researcher, Chris Tuck is a
senior lecturer, Ricky Wildman is a professor, Ian Ashcroft is
a professor, Emma Rosamond is a lecturer, and Richard Hague
is a professor, all at Loughborough University, Loughborough,
UK.


Baumers et al., Energy and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing 431




