









Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers  in  Industry


jou rn al hom ep age: www.elsev ier .com/ locate /compind


An  end-to-end  Internet  of  Things  solution  for  Reverse  Supply  Chain
Management  in  Industry  4.0


Celia  Garrido-Hidalgoa,∗, Teresa  Olivaresb,  F.  Javier  Ramirezc,  Luis  Roda-Sancheza
a Albacete Research Institute of Informatics at the University of Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain
b Computing Systems Department at the University of Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain
c School of Industrial Engineering and Department of Business Administration at the University of Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain


a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o


Article history:
Received 15 March 2019
Received in revised form 7 June 2019
Accepted 11 September 2019
Available online 24 September 2019


Keywords:
Reverse Supply Chain Management
(R-SCM)
Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
(WEEE)
IoT
Industry 4.0
BLE
LoRaWAN


a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t


The  recent  increase  in  the  number  of  products  returned  from  customers  to  retailers,  supported  by the
adoption  of  environment-friendly  policies,  has led to a  growing  need  to manage  backward  materials  and
information  flows  in  the supply  chain  (SC)  domain.  Although  numerous  authors  are  contributing  towards
circular  economy  (CE)  with  end-of-life  (EoL)  approaches  minimizing  the  negative  impact  of  Waste  Electric
and Electronic  Equipment  (WEEE),  the  information  infrastructure  behind  SC calls  for  novel  approaches
based  on  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (ICT).  In fact,  this  is  one  of  the major  challenges
for  the  so-called  Industry  4.0,  where  wireless  technologies  governed  by the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)
are expected  to transform  the industry  as  currently  conceived.  The  present  work  proposes  an  end-to-
end  solution  for  Reverse  Supply  Chain  Management  (R-SCM)  based  on  cooperation  between  different
IoT  communication  standards,  enabling  cloud-based  inventory  monitoring  of WEEE  through  embedded
sensors.  A  case  study  was  deployed  using  IoT devices  and  sensors,  carrying  out  a  set  of experimental  tests
focused  on  wireless  communications  to evaluate  its performance.  The  network  configuration  adopted
overcomes  the near  real-time  challenge  and  provides  sufficient  coverage  to interconnect  industrial  areas
such as  warehouses  or shop  floors.  The  results  point  to different  communication  bottlenecks  that  need
to  be  addressed  in order  to enhance  the  reliability  of large-scale  Industrial  IoT  (IIoT)  networks.


©  2019  Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved.


1. Introduction


The circular economy (CE) is motivated by an increasing need
to minimize the economic and environmental impact of end-of-life
(EoL) products [1]. This industrial strategy refers to the long-lasting
design, refurbishment, remanufacture, repair, recycling or reuse
of products in order to achieve the maximum benefit and avoid
negative impacts, with Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
(WEEE) being a growing concern [2]. According to the United
Nations University (UNU), 44.7 million metric tonnes of e-waste
was generated in 2016, with future estimations being even larger
[3]. While posing significant risks for the environmental and human
health, it contains recoverable raw materials with an estimated
value of 55 billion euros.


∗ Corresponding author. Address: Albacete Research Institute of Informatics at
Investigacion Street, 02071 Albacete, Spain.


E-mail addresses: celia.garrido@uclm.es (C. Garrido-Hidalgo),
Teresa.Olivares@uclm.es (T. Olivares), FranciscoJ.Ramirez@uclm.es (F.J. Ramirez),
Luis.Roda@alu.uclm.es (L. Roda-Sanchez).


Reverse logistics (RL) has become a key competence of both the
supply chain (SC) and reverse supply chain (RSC) [4,5], in which
products flow from customers to manufacturers. Reverse Supply
Chain Management (R-SCM) emerges as a new challenge, given the
necessity of managing every single stage where products should
be handled and distributed towards manufacturers, with multiple
recovery options increasing the uncertainties faced by companies
[6].


The introduction of Information and Communication Tech-
nologies (ICT) in SC and, especially, the Internet of Things (IoT)
can significantly improve process-oriented performance, reduce
energy consumption and provide SC with a ubiquitous informa-
tion infrastructure [7]. By enabling the cooperation of wireless
technologies, IoT is an accelerator of the Fourth Industrial Revolu-
tion: Industry 4.0 [8,9]. This brand-new concept is transforming the
industrial paradigm, being Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), cloud and
fog computing essential pillars [10,11]. The impact of IoT on indus-
tries is such that the concept of Industrial IoT (IIoT) is becoming
increasingly popular and has consequently been adopted in several
industrial applications governed by IoT technologies [12].


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.103127
0166-3615/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.103127













http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/compind

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.compind.2019.103127&domain=pdf

mailto:celia.garrido@uclm.es

mailto:Teresa.Olivares@uclm.es

mailto:FranciscoJ.Ramirez@uclm.es

mailto:Luis.Roda@alu.uclm.es

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.103127




2 C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


Nomenclature


AWS  Amazon Web  Services
BW Bandwidth
BLE Bluetooth Low Energy
CE Circular economy
CR Coding rate
CPS Cyber Physical Systems
DR Data rate
DSC Digital supply chain
EoL End of life
ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute
IIoT Industrial Internet of Things
ICT Information and Communication Technology
IT Information Technology
IoT Internet of Things
JSON JavaScript Object Notation
LoRaWAN Long-range wide-area network
LPWA Low-Power Wide-Area
MQTT Message Queing Telemetry Transport
RFID Radio-Frequency IDentification
RSSI Received signal strength indicator
RL Reverse logistics
RSC Reverse supply chain
R-SCM Reverse Supply Chain Management
SNR Signal-to-noise ratio
SBC Single-board computer
SF Spreading factor
STD Standard deviation
SC Supply chain
SCM Supply chain management
TTN The Things Network
UNU United Nations University
WEEE Waste Electric and Electronic Equipment


Despite the large body of literature addressing IoT applications
in the supply chain management (SCM) domain, the RSC field
specifically needs more integrated approaches based on IoT com-
munication standards to manage the RL of WEEE in real contexts.
To fill this gap in the literature, this paper presents a novel Industry
4.0 end-to-end IoT framework as a solution for WEEE management.


The following aspects of this work can be highlighted. First, the
proposal of a heterogeneous IoT network enabling low-power and
low-cost SCM operations in the context of Industry 4.0. For this, we
propose the cooperation of three emerging IoT technologies for R-
SCM, presenting a case study based on the recovery of WEEE from
computer-based components. Second, the implementation of an
end-to-end system, addressing the deployment of sensor-nodes,
the network infrastructure, and its integration with a cloud-based
inventory-management platform. In order to evaluate end-to-end
performance, a set of experimental tests are proposed, carried out
and discussed.


The three wireless technologies selected and addressed in this
work are RFID [13], Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) [14] and LoRaWAN
[15], which are tested under different communication schemes and
physical-layer parameters. Our results illustrate the suitability of
the proposed IoT standards for R-SCM purposes, underlining com-
munication optimizations for large-scale industrial deployments.


The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we  review the
literature; the IoT framework for R-SCM is presented in Section 3;
Section 4 presents a WEEE-focused case study; Section 5 addresses
the experiments, results and discussion; and finally, Section 6 pro-
vides conclusions and identifies future research lines.


2. Related works


This section provides a review of the most relevant works and
applications of computer-based systems in the industrial sector,
highlighting the main contributions and gaps that encourage us to
propose and evaluate an end-to-end heterogeneous IoT framework
for R-SCM purposes.


2.1. Circular economy


The principles of CE were first outlined by Kneese et al. [16]
dealing with the management of residuals and the improvement
of environmental quality. Recently, its scope has been broadened
to not only involve the minimization of natural resources but also
the ability to reuse materials [17]. Currently, resources are mined,
turned into products and finally discarded [18]. As a result, our soci-
ety is generating scarcity, volatility, unaffordable manufacturing
costs and, what is more worrying, an unprecedented absence of
natural resources [19]. According to Vella [20], a shift towards a cir-
cular economy could bring savings of D 600bn for EU businesses, and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2–4% every year, which highlights
the necessity of adopting CE strategies.


In this context, WEEE is receiving special attention, being one of
the fastest-growing waste streams with a 33% increase in volume
reported during the last five years [21]. The roots of this increase are
connected with exponentially-growing consumer demand, tech-
nology uptake, and shorter replacement cycles. Moreover, the
adoption of free-shipping policies on part of most companies has
accelerated electronic commerce, where the product-return ratio
has risen to 30%, more than three times that of brick and mortar
sales [22].


In the European Union, e-waste is regulated by the Directive
2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and Council [23]. Accord-
ing to a recent communication, in 2015 only four European Union
Member States recycled over half of the electronic products put
on the market [24]. This is supported by Eurostat [25], which pub-
lished a report concluding that the lowest recycling rate of waste
streams corresponds to e-waste (32%) followed by plastics (40%). In
fact, 44.7 million metric tonnes of e-waste was generated globally
in 2016, with an annual growth rate up to 5% on a weight basis [3].
Apart from the need to mitigate environmental pollution, the eco-
nomic value associated with raw materials present in such e-waste
is estimated at 55 billion euros [3].


In pursuit of a reduction of waste streams through an
environment-friendly and cost-saving approach, remanufacturing
has become one of the most feasible EoL strategies to restore
products to ‘like-new’ condition. If well-organized and planned,
it can expand the life-cycle of products and increase profits of
manufacturing companies through reducing landfills [26]. Despite
being under-recognized in the current industrial landscape, reman-
ufacturing generated 29.8 billion euros in turnover and 192,000
employment in the European Union in the year 2015, with expec-
tations of attaining an annual value of 100 billion euros in 2030
[27].


As part of the European Research Framework H2020, the Euro-
pean Remanufacturing Network has facilitated the development
of sustainable partnerships between organizations, similarly to
the ResCoM (Resource Conservative Manufacturing) initiative and
its successor ReCiPS (Resource-Efficient Circular Product-Service-
Systems).


In this context, information-sharing capabilities enable coop-
eration among suppliers, manufacturers and recyclers, being
necessary to take responsibility for the collection, disposal and
recovery of products at their EoL [28]. In the literature, Garcia-
Muiña et al. [29] explore the transition stages towards circularity
and propose a theoretical ICT-based framework where materi-














C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 3


als are sourced to manufacturers following a CE model. A similar
approach is provided by Asif et al. [30], who design an ICT frame-
work for information-sharing in pursue of a product-as-a-service
model in the washing-machine industry. Finally, Gu et al. [31] pro-
vide a theoretical IoT framework for WEEE management but lacking
ICT details and practical implementations.


None of these works focus on using IoT technologies to address
information flows being exchanged upwards the SC or evaluate the
performance of communications, which we believe is a necessary
condition. Our work, additionally, focuses on WEEE and provides
a detailed framework describing the handling stages of products
from their EoL stage to their reuse in a R-SCM context.


2.2. Digital supply chain


The SCM strategic objectives have been widely defined in the lit-
erature as cost, quality,  speed, flexibility and dependability [32–34].
During recent years, sustainability has gained special interest, with
insufficient communication capabilities being a major obstacle to
its adoption [35]. In this context, a number of SC information-
infrastructure requirements have emerged, namely: flexibility, cost,
time, quality,  accuracy, reliability, visibility and availability [36,37].


The digital supply chain (DSC) is thus a growing area of research
interest, calling for innovative approaches based on emergent
technologies to manage SC processes. Its major challenges were
recently defined by Büyüközkan and Göç er [38], converging in:
speed (ability to react quickly to demand), flexibility (agile reac-
tion), global connectivity (internet-enabled SC), real-time inventory
(continuous monitoring of stocks levels), intelligence (self-learning
smart products), cost-effectiveness (use of technology to increase
organizational performance), transparency (adjusting networks to
changing scenarios), scalability (optimization and duplication of
processes), innovation (in pursue of competitiveness and excel-
lence), proactivity (anticipating issues prior to occurrence) and
eco-friendly (environmental emphasis).


Information and material flows need to be managed efficiently
in downstream and upstream directions [18,39,2]. The main differ-
ences between forward and reverse SCs lie in distribution channels
(standardized vs. exception-driven), transparency (asset-tracking
information available vs. poor asset visibility) and timing require-
ments (time-critical vs. non-time-critical), among others [40].


2.3. The role of IoT in the Fourth Industrial Revolution


IoT, a term first coined by Ashton [41] with regard to SCM, pro-
vides physical objects – or Things – with sensing and ubiquitous
communication capabilities. Despite being initially conceived for
customer-oriented applications, the latest advances have enabled
a broader scope for IoT, permitting the integration of sensors in
industrial facilities, equipment and resources towards the so-called
IIoT [42,43]. In this context, the Fourth Industrial Revolution – or
Industry 4.0 [44] – emerged incorporating CPS into traditional fac-
tories governed by IIoT, which promises great advances [45,46].


Several authors provide IoT approaches to wireless com-
munications [47]. The BLE standard has been widely studied
from energy-efficiency [48,49] and low-latency [50] perspectives.
Rondón et al. [51] provide an in-depth evaluation of BLE, supporting
its suitability for time-critical industrial applications. Likewise, the
performance of the LoRaWAN standard was studied by Sanchez-
Iborra et al. [52]; important studies also exist on improving capacity
[53] and communication performance [54,55].


Hofmann and Rüsch [56] regard real-time information flows, end-
to-end transparency and flexibility as three key objectives of Industry
4.0, whereas Büyüközkan and Göç er [38] highlight the necessity
of integrating sensor networks in heterogeneous environments
towards this goal. Nevertheless, there is great disparity across coun-


tries in terms of Industry 4.0 adoption, which is a potential barrier
to advancement [57]. Two major areas of research are highlighted
based on the gaps that our work aims to fill in the Industry 4.0 field:
heterogeneous approaches based on wireless technologies collab-
oration and end-to-end applications oriented towards specific use
cases.


As heterogeneous approaches, Gioia et al. [58] present an IoT
gateway integrating multiple sensors, buses and technologies,
while Garrido-Hidlago et al. [59] describe the implementation of a
hybrid network to improve working conditions in industry through
the use of industrial wearables [60]. Regarding end-to-end appli-
cations, Tao and Qi [61] propose an IT-driven framework towards
smart manufacturing. In the domain of SCM, Abdel-Basset et al.
[62] present a framework for IoT-enabled securely-efficient sys-
tems, Papert and Pflaum [63] define an ecosystem to encourage IoT
services in the domain of SCM and Wakenshaw [64] presents an IoT
integration framework.


Table 1 provides a comparison of the most representative works
in our literature review. Many of these studies address descriptive
approaches or simulations, whereas others focus on the experi-
mental evaluation of a single IoT standard lacking of an end-to-end
perspective or industry-oriented deployment concerning a hetero-
geneous IoT ecosystem. We  fill this gap in the literature proposing
and testing a real end-to-end IoT solution based on a heterogeneous
network proposal for R-SCM of WEEE.


3. IoT framework for R-SCM


This section describes an IoT R-SCM framework proposal to
manage WEEE, aimed at providing manufacturers with a novel
ubiquitous information infrastructure behind SC for tracking of
parts to be recovered. For this, we first select the set of IoT standards
for the deployment (based on a communication-range criterion)
and, then, the main stages of the framework are described accord-
ing to their functionality and information flows.


Our proposed IoT-based WEEE management framework is sup-
ported by a twofold approach: on the one hand, the presentation
of an industrial solution to contribute to filling a real gap of WEEE
management across SC and, on the other, the provision of an IoT
network architecture to connect SC with a transparent inventory-
management infrastructure in the context of Industry 4.0.


3.1. Selection of IoT standards


The proposed R-SCM framework distinguishes between three
sets of IoT standards according to their communication range:
short-range, intermediate-range and long-range. MQTT [66] was
selected for data transmission between physical devices (IoT net-
work deployed in the facilities) and virtual data infrastructures
(inventory cloud platform), while a unique standard was selected
from each set to fulfill the framework requirements:


Short-range communication. We  selected high-frequency RFID
[13] over NFC [67] for the identification of returned products in the
framework. Despite being popular for contactless payment, infor-
mation sharing and user-oriented applications, NFC is not suitable
for industrial use. High and ultra-high frequency RFID offer robust-
ness against metal interference and a greater communication range
(typically in the order of tens of meters).


Intermediate-range communication. BLE [14] was selected over
Wi-Fi [68] or ZigBee [69] for local data transmission and inventory
management in the framework. Although operating in the same
frequency bands, BLE is oriented toward IoT applications where
the volume of information to be sent is small and low power is
encouraged, having become a disruptive standard for Industrial IoT
applications.














4
 


C
.


 G
arrid


o-H
id


algo,
 T.


 O
livares,


 F.J.
 R


am
irez


 et
 al.


 /
 C


om
p


u
ters


 in
 In


d
u


stry
 1


1
2


 (2
0


1
9


)
 1


0
3


1
2


7


Table 1
Comparison of the main contributions found in the literature.
Source  Method  Scope  or  domain  area End-to-end  ICT  infrastructure Heterogeneous  IoT  network


Descriptive  Theoretical  Case  study Simulation  Implementation  Experimental  Industry  4.0 Internet  of
Things


Circular
economy


Reverse
logistics


WEEE  Framework  Perception
layer


Network
layer


Application
layer


Performance
test


RFID-
based


BLE-
based


LoRaWAN-
based


IP-based


Abdel-Basset  et  al.
[62]


√ √  √ √  √  √


Asif et  al.  [30]
√ √ √ √ √


Cattani et  al.  [54]
√ √  √  √ √ √ √


Cho et  al.  [50]
√ √ √ √


Cuomo et  al.  [55]
√ √ √ √


Dementyev  et al.
[49]


√  √  √  √


Garcia-Muiña et  al.
[29]


√ √ √ √ √ √


Garrido-Hidalgo
et al.  [59]


√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √


Genovese et  al.  [17]
√  √  √


Gioia et  al.  [58]
√  √  √ √  √


Gu et  al.  [31]
√  √  √ √  √  √  √


Papert and  Pflaum
[63]


√ √ √ √


Roda-Sanchez  et  al.
[60]


√  √ √ √ √  √ √


Rondón et  al.  [51]
√  √  √  √  √


Sanchez-Iborra
et al.  [52]


√  √  √


Siekkinen et  al.  [48]
√ √ √ √ √ √


Tao et  al.  [65]
√ √ √ √


Wakenshaw  [64]
√ √ √  √


Yang et  al.  [28]
√  √  √  √  √  √ √  √


Zorbas et  al.  [53]
√  √  √  √


Our work
√  √  √  √  √ √  √  √  √  √  √  √ √  √  √  √  √






C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 5


Fig. 1. R-SCM IoT framework based on: Identification Stage (i), Classification Stage (ii), Smart Containers (iii), Hybrid Gateway (iv), LoRaWAN Gateway (v), TTN (vi), AWS
(vii).


Long-range communication. Regarding Low-Power Wide-Area
(LPWA) standards, LoRaWAN [70] was selected over NB-IoT [71]
or Sigfox [72] for environmental monitoring of assets and inter-
connection of industrial facilities. The main advantages of NB-IoT
and Sigfox technologies lie in their narrowband implementation
providing robustness against noise and, specifically, Sigfox has the
lowest chip cost and NB-IoT the lowest network latencies. However,
LoRaWAN is the best choice for bidirectional communication and
provides more flexibility, enabling firmware upgrades over-the-air,
a unique feature of this technology oriented toward large-scale IoT
deployments. Furthermore, LoRaWAN provides better robustness
against mobility, which we regard as an essential requirement for
SC scenarios.


3.2. Description of the stages


The proposed framework offers end-to-end IoT integration com-
bining physical devices and sensors, wireless communications
(RFID, BLE and LoRaWAN) and platforms for data storage and ana-
lytics. Fig. 1 shows the framework, the main components of which
are the Identification Stage, Inspection Stage, Classification Stage,
Smart Containers and Hybrid Gateway.


This work is aimed at deploying the communications infras-
tructure able to manage data gathered during the recovery of
WEEE, with the Inspection Stage being outside the scope of the
concerned network. Nevertheless, this stage is responsible for the
disassembly of products and the refurbishment of modular compo-
nents to ensure that they meet the necessary conditions for reuse.
Non-recoverable components are sent to repair or recycling plants
depending on their deterioration. Once reusable parts are classi-


Table 2
IoT standards used (classified as input or output).


Framework stage Input standards Output standards


(i) Identification Stage RFID BLE 4.0
(ii)  Classification Stage BLE 4.2 None
(iii) Smart Containers None BLE 4.0
(iv) Hybrid Gateway BLE 4.2 LoRaWAN, MQTT
(v) LoRaWAN Gateway LoRaWAN IP
(vi) TTN IP None
(vii) AWS  IoT Core MQTT MQTT


fied into separate containers, the Hybrid Gateway is responsible
for collecting data and managing two flows of information: global
(inventory updates) and local (environmental information).


Table 2 summarizes the compliance with IoT standards: the
Identification Stage (i) combines RFID technology to scan tagged
products with BLE to forward the information to the Classifica-
tion Stage (ii), received via BLE 4.2. The Smart Containers (iii) use
BLE to update inventory and environmental information, which is
received by the Hybrid Gateway (iv) and respectively forwarded
through the LoRaWAN Gateway (v) to The Things Network [73],
TTN (vi) or via MQTT to IoT Core platform in Amazon Web  Services
[74], AWS  (vii).


Identification Stage (i).  The aim of this stage is to read informa-
tion written on RFID tags to identify the reason of return and the
other key aspects of products. Tags are expected to be attached
by the retailers or manufacturers shipping the EoL products, and
written according to an agreed data-encryption algorithm – as,
for example, the one proposed by ElMahgoub [75] – in order to
control data access and simplify the identification of products
entering the system. Once read, an actuator system would intro-






6 C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


Fig. 2. Algorithm used for classification and communication.


duce reusable products into containers and let defective products
continue through the system. At the Identification Stage the device
is provided with RFID and BLE modules. Once the RFID tags are
scanned, this device (under the slave BLE role) exchanges informa-
tion with its master (Classification Stage).


Classification Stage (ii).  This stage is the core of the framework,
where information about products and parts is collected. The parts
received at this stage will have passed a quality control test, and are
thus assumed to be reusable. The device located in this stage acts
as BLE master and receives information from the previous stage by
discovering the services and reading the characteristics of the slave
(according to the BLE specification in Bluetooth SIG [14]). The Clas-
sification Stage includes a database where standard part models
are stored to access information such as reference models, kind of
product or weight. Subsequently, the device weighs parts to clas-
sify them. Fig. 2 provides a detailed description of the classification
algorithm, where producttype refers to a product subset (kind of
product, i.e. laptop or desktop computer) and parttype to the spe-
cific models of the parts stored with additional information in a
JSON file.


Smart Containers (iii). These devices integrate a microcontroller
platform, a load cell and an accelerometer, being able to commu-
nicate via BLE under the BLE advertiser role to update inventory
and context information. This stage is designed to weigh parts
and calculate the available number of parts of each type to be
reused, turning containers into useful real-time platforms. Every
time acceleration suffers a significant change, an interruption event
wakes up the microcontroller and measures weight: if it has
changed, it will recalculate the number of items (according to the
type of parts inside each container) and send a packet via BLE (see
Fig. 2).


Hybrid Gateway (iv). This device is intended to collect informa-
tion emitted by BLE advertisers,  the Smart Containers, (for which
it assumes the role of scanner) and classify it according to a
local/global criterion. Two kinds of information flows are created
in the Hybrid Gateway (see Fig. 1):


• Local information flow. This information is generated in Smart
Containers when something unexpected occurs (i.e. low battery
level of devices) and is sent to the Hybrid Gateway. This device
is responsible for encapsulating this context data, adding sensed
ambient information, and sending it through a LoRaWAN gate-
way (v) to TTN (vi).


Fig. 3. Disassembly stages: Identification (i), Classification (ii) and Smart Containers
(iii).


• Global information flow. This consists of inventory data updated
by Smart Containers. The Hybrid Gateway, acting as a BLE scanner,
receives a mixed information flow, filters it and publishes inven-
tory updates via MQTT in AWS  IoT Core (vii). Once data is stored
in AWS, any authorized entity could subscribe to get immediate
inventory updates.


4. Case study


Personal computers have become one of the major concerns
regarding waste-streams generation, given a considerable decrease
in their average useful life over the years and a high environmental
impact associated with their disposal. Nevertheless, most com-
ponents found in computers are in good condition for reuse or
refurbishment and, depending on their added value, these can be
brought back to the required degree of quality as presented in [26].


Following this idea, the scenario selected for the case study was
an industrial environment focused on the recovery of computer-
based products. Fig. 3 represents the flow of products and parts
throughout the stages of the system in our case study scenario.


The two subsets of products used in the experiments were
desktop and laptop computers, which entered the system being
identified via RFID. Then, products would be sent to the Inspec-
tion Stage, where the appropriate EoL strategy would be applied
according to their added value and condition (outside the scope
of the case study). For classification, we used components disas-
sembled from damaged computers, which are shown in Table 3, in
addition to their approximate cost and main specifications used by
the classification algorithm (see Fig. 2).


The case study consisted in the identification and classification
of components using sensors and communication modules, which
were attached to the microcontroller-based platforms deployed
throughout the R-SCM system. The implementation and deploy-
ment of a real hardware prototype permitted the evaluation of IoT
communications taking place in the end-to-end system.


The single-board computers (SBC), sensors and radio communi-
cation modules used to deploy the prototype are shown in Table 4.
LightBlue Bean as an implementation of the ATmega 328P micro-
controller with the LBM313 BLE radio was used for Identification
Stage (i) and Smart Containers (iv); LoPy as an implementation of
Xtensa LX6 including the BLE/Wi-Fi ESP32 and the LoRa SX1276
radio module was used to develop the Hybrid Gateway; a Raspberry
Pi 2B based on the BCM2836 microprocessor was used to deploy the
LoRaWAN gateway (on the roof of the testing building); a Raspberry
Pi Zero W based on the BCM2835 and the CYW43438 BLE radio was
used for the Classification Stage. Additionally, we  attached two type
of sensors to LightBlue Bean: load cells and ambient sensors, specifi-
cally, three two-kilogram straight load cells and Pysense to test the
proposal using the temperature-and-humidity integrated sensor
Si7006-A20. Regarding radio modules, the RC522 RFID communi-
cation module was included at the Identification Stage, operating at
high-frequency (13.56 MHz) and the iC880A LoRaWAN concentra-
tor (integrating the SX1301 transceiver) with an external 868 MHz






C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 7


Table  3
Specifications of WEEE parts used in the experiments.


WEEE Part type Part model Subset Weight (g) Cost (D )


Hard disk ST31000340AS Desktop 642 90


Network card HE-012D Desktop 60 10


Network card FT16-04B3 Desktop 55 15


Network card GTS FC-515 Desktop 56 9


Graphic card QUADRO FX-580 Desktop 220 139


RAM KTM2865-SR Desktop 18 17


RAM CF81037 Laptop 8 40


Table 4
Hardware used in the deployment (radio specifications are marked as input(i) or
output(o) information flows).


Framework stage Core Sensors Radio modules


(i) Identification Stage ATmega 328P None MFRC522(i) , LBM313(o)


(ii) Classification Stage BCM2835 TAL 220 CYW43438(i/o)


(iii) Smart Containers ATmega 328P TAL 220 LBM313(o)


(iv) Hybrid Gateway Xtensa LX6 Si7006-A20 ESP32(i/o) , SX1276(o)


(v) LoRaWAN Gateway BCM2836 None SX1301(i) , Ethernet(o)


Fig. 4. Prototype developed for evaluation of the R-SCM framework, showing: Iden-
tification Stage (i), Classification Stage (ii), Smart Containers (iii) and Hybrid Gateway
(iv).


antenna was used for the LoRaWAN gateway deployment (located
outdoors, on the roof of the Albacete Research Institute of Infor-
matics).


All the materials (except the LoRaWAN gateway) were dis-
tributed and screwed to a wooden board in order to implement
a low-cost prototype that permitted us to test the communication
performance of the different standards. Fig. 4 shows the resulting
prototype.


5. Results and discussion


The experiments were designed to satisfy a set of performance
tests to assess the strengths and limitations of the R-SCM pro-
posal under IoT criteria [76]. These tests are described in Table 5


and scaled according to real-world experiments with IoT devices
instead of simulations.


The TNSC metric quantifies the influence of increasing Smart
Containers on latency (BLE standard); TOA the Time-on-Air at
LoRaWAN end-devices as a function of payload, complying with
ETSI [77] regulations of 1% duty cycle, NPCK; T1, T2, T3 provide a
disaggregated end-to-end communication latency considering the
cooperation of all technologies; RSSI (received signal strength indi-
cator) and SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) determine the signal quality
perceived at the LoRaWAN Gateway depending on end-device loca-
tion.


Table 6 showcases the setup of the experiments, where Ga is
the antenna gain, Ptx the transmission power and Srx the receiver
sensitivity. The conditions for the Geographic Spread experiments
were cloudless skies and temperatures from 26 to 30 ◦C, in Albacete,
Spain. The height of the transmitting end-device was  2 meters,
and the height of the LoRaWAN gateway 18 m.  The LoRaWAN
specification [15] provides further information on physical-layer
parameters: spreading factor (SF), coding rate (CR), data rate (DR)
and bandwidth (BW); and the BLE specification [14] provides more
details on the main network roles used in this work, namely: scan-
ner/advertiser in broadcasting mode and master/slave in connection
mode.


5.1. Data ingest test


A scaled system would imply the addition of new lines with
incoming products and, thus, the increase of BLE traffic received by
the Hybrid Gateway and forwarded via MQTT to AWS. Whereas
the former could become a potential bottleneck for the sys-
tem, the latter has been widely tested in the literature with no
apparent scalability limitations for IoT, reaching up to 263,314
packets received and 23,184 sent per hour under a 0% packet loss
[78].


A series of BLE-based experiments was carried out to evalu-
ate the influence of increasing the number of Smart Containers,
updating inventory information to a same Hybrid Gateway. For
this, the NRF Connect [79] software was used to ingest BLE traffic
in the network and measure the resulting TNSC . Each experi-






8 C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


Table  5
IoT-oriented tests to evaluate the prototype.


Stages involved Test Description Metrics


(iii), (iv) Data ingest Influence of traffic on performance TNSC
(iv), (v) Data size Influence of payload on performance TOA , NPCK
(i) → (iv), (vii) Network latency Disaggregated end-to-end performance T1, T2, T3
(iv), (v) Geographic spread Influence of distance on signal quality RSSI, SNR


Table 6
Experiments setup: parameters and IoT standards specifications in the R-SCM solution.


Parameter RFID Bluetooth low energy (BLE) LoRaWAN


Role Reader Master/Slave Advertiser Scanner End-device Gateway
Frequency 13.56 MHz  2.4 GHz 2.4 GHz 2.4 GHz 868 MHz  868 MHz
Modulation ASK GFSK GFSK PSK LoRa LoRa
Radiation Directional Directional Omnidirectional Omnidirectional Omnidirectional Omnidirectional
Ga (dBi) – – 1.7 – 3 8
Ptx (dBm) Variable 8.5 3 7.5 14 14
Srx (dBm) – −97 −93 −98 – −136/−120


Fig. 5. Influence of the increase of Smart Containers NSC in the minimum receiving
time (TNSC ) for BLE advertising intervals of 100, 250 and 1000 ms.


ment was carried out ten times increasing traffic conditions under
low-power (1000-ms advertising), balanced (250 ms)  and low-
latency (100 ms)  configurations. The resulting average is shown in
Fig. 5a.


The results provided in Fig. 5a highlight the communication
time required in case of simultaneous transmission attempts on
the part of Smart Containers. Fig. 5b provides the normalized min-
imum receiving time of the Hybrid Gateway for a given number of
Smart Containers, obtained as the inverse of the minimum receiv-


ing time divided by the advertising interval. Eqs. (1) to (3) provide
the tendency lines and curves obtained from the experiment data:


!
TNSC (100ms) = 0.0129 × NSC + 0.0183 R


2 = 0.9547


T̂NSC (100ms) = 1.0323 × N
−0.530
SC R


2 = 0.9687
(1)


!
TNSC (250ms) = 0.0189 × NSC + 0.4669 R


2 = 0.8551


T̂NSC (250ms) = 0.9663 × N
−0.416
SC R


2 = 0.9206
(2)


!
TNSC (1000ms) = 0.0529 × NSC + 1.8576 R


2 = 0.8326


T̂NSC (1000ms) = 0.9766 × N
−0.368
SC R


2 = 0.9285
(3)


The advertising interval implies the reception of one packet
of each container every 100 ms  for a low-latency configuration,
250 ms  for balanced and 1000 ms  for low power. However, as the
number of Smart Containers increases, we observe in the results
how the proportional time required to receive a single packet also
increases (see Fig. 5a). Let us consider the low-power configuration
as an example: with devices advertising every 1000 ms,  the ideal
TNSC would be 1000 ms,  but experimentally ranges from 2000 to
4500 depending on NSC.


If different advertising intervals are considered for the same
NSC, taking into account Fig. 5b, important conclusions are reached.
Let us consider the worst-case scenario with 50 containers trans-
mitting simultaneously (NSC = 50): for a low-latency configuration,
the ideal TNSC , 100 ms,  is up to 10 times lower than the experi-
mental one (nearly 1000 ms  according to Fig. 5a), whereas for a
low-power configuration this value is approximately 5 times lower
than the expected (1000 ms  ideally with respect to the nearly 5000
ms reached experimentally). This can be observed in Fig. 5b, where
the normalized minimum receiving time (T̂NSC ) for a low-power
configuration is two times that of low-latency.


Thus, despite the low-power configuration having a worse abso-
lute latency, the normalized results show that in this case the
effectiveness of transmissions is the highest. This means that the
proportion of packets lost during communication increases with
the number of containers (NSC) and also with the reduction of the
advertising interval. The origin of the problem may  be related to col-
lisions taking place when the BLE traffic in the network is increased
(either augmenting the transmitting frequency or the number of
devices in the network). Further research is required to assess the
origin of this packet loss in pursuit of more efficient large-scale
industrial networks.






C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 9


Fig. 6. Influence of LoRaWAN end-devices packet size (CR of 4/5, BW of 125 kHz and different SF) in TOA and NPCK for a 1% duty cycle.


5.2. Data size test


This test focuses on the LoRaWAN network, since the per-
formance of LPWA is significantly influenced by variable data
payloads. In contrast to the data ingest test, where scalability
implied a scenario with increased traffic, this experiment aimed
to highlight the required Time-on-Air (TOA metric in Table 5) of
LoRaWAN end-devices for different configurations and volumes of
data.


Following the standard [15], the LoRa physical layer uses several
chips to encode each symbol, resulting in SF configurations ranging
typically from SF7 (27 chips/symbol) to SF12 (212 chips/symbol). In
order to calculate the Time-on-Air required when setting different
SFs, the symbol duration (Tsym) should be defined as shown in Eq.
(4):


Tsym =
2SF


BW
(4)


Eq. (5) provides the formula to obtain the TOA metric (see [80]
design guide). The payloadSymbNb was computed considering the
presence of a header. The preamble duration was obtained accord-
ing to Eq. (6) as a function of the symbol duration (Tsym) and the
number of preamble symbols (npreamble) and, then, the packet dura-
tion was obtained according to Eq. (7) as a function of the symbol
duration (Tsym) and the number of header and payload symbols
(payloadSymbNb):


TOA = Tpreamble + Theader+payload (5)


Tpreamble = Tsym × (4.25 + npreamble) (6)


Theader+payload = Tsym × payloadSymbNb (7)


Fig. 6a shows the required TOA for 10-to-50-byte payloads for
different SF configurations. The results range from approximately
70 ms  to 2.8 s. Although, the number of LoRaWAN end-devices used
for the experiments was not sufficiently large to involve communi-
cation bottlenecks in the R-SCM approach proposed, the results of
this test are useful to focus on a further industry-oriented scalability
of the system.


For large-scale deployments, the coexistence of several LoRa
devices transmitting under the same SF configuration involves


significant probability of failed transmissions due to intra-SF colli-
sions (collisions occurring when two devices transmit at the same
time, using the same frequency band and SF). Additionally, inter-
collisions can also be noticed when the same frequency band is
shared but different SFs are set up, although this is less likely to
occur [53]. In view of the TOA results obtained, high SF configura-
tions and long payloads should be avoided, when possible, in order
to reduce the probability of collisions caused by a long channel-
occupancy time.


The results are useful to determine the maximum number of
LoRa-based transmissions permitted for any end-device according
to 1% duty cycle regulations (see ETSI [77] for further documenta-
tion). Fig. 6b provides a useful approximation, based on the results
from Fig. 6a. Let us consider a 20-byte payload configured under
SF10 as an example: in this case, ETSI would limit an end-device to
transmitting, at most, 2000 packets per day (more than sufficient
for environmental monitoring in distributed warehouses). How-
ever, TTN restrictions of 30 s of TOA per device and day [81] applied
to Fig. 6a results would only permit 60 packets in the previous
situation. For this reason, further research is required to use alter-
native self-deployed network servers to enhance the framework
flexibility.


5.3. Network latency test


This test quantified stage-to-stage and end-to-end latencies of
the inventory-management functionality of the system for a given
configuration, since the local functionality (LoRaWAN-based) was
tested in depth in Section 5.2. The metrics used to provide the
results are T1, T2 and T3 (see Table 5), which correspond to those
represented in the sequence diagram in Fig. 7. This experiment pro-
vides an overall latency approach based on the cooperation of RFID,
BLE and MQTT standards, with all BLE devices being programmed
with advertising intervals of 100 ms.


In Fig. 7, T1 refers to the time elapsed from when a new product
is identified via RFID and metadata is sent via BLE to Classifica-
tion Stage, until the acknowledgement is received. T2 refers to
the time elapsed from when a new part is noticed in a Smart
Container until the BLE advertisement packet containing the inven-
tory update reaches the Hybrid Gateway. Finally, T3 is the time






10 C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


Fig. 7. Sequence diagram of the inventory-management system (T1, T2 and T3 metrics).


Table 7
Results of the network latency test (in ms).


Metric Average Maximum Minimum STD Stages involved


T1 185.530 214.184 166.960 23.220 (i), (ii)
T2 124.635 170.744 117.920 18.631 (iii), (iv)
T3 65.724 69.909 62.106 2.457 (iv), (vii)


elapsed between an inventory update being received via BLE and
a client subscribed via MQTT to the topic-of-interest receiving the
notification.


The measured latency of the end-to-end system is shown in
Table 7, according to metrics T1, T2 and T3. The experimental results
show T1 and T2 are significantly higher than T3, which means that
no communication constraints or bottlenecks might be noticed
when scaling MQTT connectivity with the AWS  IoT platform.
Metrics T1 and T2 should be analyzed according to the commu-
nication standards and industrial process associated with each
one.


If we consider the inspection of components between the RFID-
based identification of products and the classification of parts (see
Fig. 1), an average latency of approximately 185 ms,  T1, would not
limit the performance of the R-SCM system. Conversely, our results
point to the fact that T2, the BLE link between Smart Containers and
their Hybrid Gateway, could limit the speed of the system if laten-
cies of all stages are compared. Nevertheless, an overall minimum
delay of 124 ms  would not limit the inventory-monitoring func-
tionality of the system, especially considering the requirements
associated with the RL purpose of the system [40].


5.4. Geographic spread test


This test evaluates LoRaWAN coverage based on RSSI and SNR
(see Table 5) using the TTN Mapper [82] tool. Fig. 8 shows a map  of
the city of Albacete (Spain), the scenario used for the experiments.
The gateway is represented by a cross and end-device positions (P)
into equidistant circles.


Table 8 shows and interprets the results. Since the receiver sen-
sitivity and, consequently, the minimum SNR is different per SF, the
SNR results in Table 8 should only be compared in columns.


Since RSSI and SNR should not be considered absolute values,
Eqs. (8)a to (8)f simplify our quality (Q) interpretation criteria. Given
the implementation of transceivers [83], when the signal is suffi-
ciently strong, it is attenuated avoiding overload. RSSI and SNR are
obtained after attenuation, which is why SNR values equal or higher
than 5 dB have been attenuated. In such cases, only RSSI provides
relevant information (the lower its absolute value, the better). Oth-


erwise, the minimum SNR threshold supported (−7.5 dB for SF7,
−10 dB for SF8, etc.) is considered to calculate a margin:


(8)


The influence of vegetation is noticed at P ♦ .1rural and P ⋆ .1rural
as a reduction in the SNR margin with respect to right-hand-side
locations (P ♦ .2rural and P ⋆ .2rural), under line-of-sight. The urban
measurements show the influence of infrastructures on reliability.
For instance, P ◦ .2urban was measured with no surrounding build-


ings, whereas in P △ .3urban and P . 2urban buildings were present.
Our experiments show that LoRaWAN presented no communica-
tion problems in rural scenarios, with low SFs being sufficient for
wide areas. Conversely, the urban results call for high SF allocations,
since only SF12 achieved 100% of success.


6. Conclusions


This work presents an Industry 4.0 solution for R-SCM based
on a heterogeneous IoT network following DSC objectives. BLE
and RFID technologies are proposed for inventory management
using Smart Containers, while a LoRaWAN context network is
responsible for environmental monitoring of industrial facilities.
The network is governed by a Hybrid Gateway, responsible for
receiving BLE information and forwarding it to two back-ends: an
inventory-monitoring platform in AWS  (via MQTT) and a context-
information platform in TTN (via LoRaWAN). This solution was
developed within a real IoT prototype and applied to an industrial
case study regarding WEEE recovery towards CE.


Four performance tests were conducted to evaluate the pro-
posal: data ingest (assessing the influence of increasing traffic),
geographical spread (wide-area communication), data size (varying
payloads) and network latency (end-to-end evaluation). Our results
achieve reasonably appropriate network latencies for inventory
management, suggesting that BLE communication might become
a potential bottleneck for large-scale deployments. In such sit-
uations, the minimum receiving time at the Hybrid Gateway
increases proportionally with the number of Smart Containers and,
in addition, lower advertising intervals result in faster commu-
nications at the expense of lower effectiveness. Furthermore, a
LoRaWAN-based coverage study was carried out in Albacete (Spain)
concerning urban and rural scenarios. Our results show how dis-






C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 11


Fig. 8. Coverage study scenario in the city of Albacete with urban and rural locations.


Table 8
Geographic spread test results showing RSSI (dBm) and SNR (dB) metrics of LoRaWAN technology in urban and rural scenarios (range in meters), with a coding rate (CR) of
4/5,  bandwidth (BW) of 125 kHz.


tance as well as interposed buildings or vegetation areas impact
on the perceived signal quality. Finally, we experimentally show to
what extent higher SF allocations increase the coverage area and
discuss its implications.


The deployment and evaluation of a network prototype serve
as a demonstrator of the potential of IoT adoption in R-SCM sce-
narios, which carries important managerial insights. Stakeholders
could benefit from this solution achieving better management
of resources based on real-time inventory information through
a low-cost and low-power infrastructure. Additionally, seamless
monitoring of facilities is achieved through a self-monitored con-
text information network able to report shop-floor incidences. With
data-sharing being one of the barriers towards IT adoption, the
proposed approach enables the use of data-encryption algorithms


to control information accessibility depending on established rela-
tionships between manufacturers and R-SCM operators. As a result,
IoT can be conceived as a tool to facilitate information manage-
ment in EoL product-recovery operations contributing to the shift
towards the CE.


As future work, we plan to assess the economic and environ-
mental viability of the proposed approach for different types of
products, considering factors such as their degree-of-deterioration,
their added-value according to condition, or the required remanu-
facturing operations. Furthermore, based on the results obtained in
this work, the IoT communications network proposed will be used
as a testbed to develop algorithms oriented to test and improve the
energy efficiency and reliability of communications, while improv-
ing the network capacity of LoRaWAN and BLE technologies in






12 C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127


real industrial scenarios. For this, we aim to develop scheduling
algorithms able to minimize collisions in the network and, thus,
improve reliability through avoiding repeated transmissions.


Declarations of interest


None.


Acknowledgments


This work was partially supported by the Spanish “Ministry
of the Economy and Competitiveness” and the European Union
(FEDER Funds) under projects ECO2016-75781-P and RTI2018-
098156-B-C52, and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council (EPSRC), UK, grant no. EP/N018524/1.


References


Cong, L., Zhao, F., Sutherland, J.W., 2017. Integration of dismantling operations into
a  value recovery plan for circular economy. J. Clean. Prod. 149, 378–386.


Islam, M.T., Huda, N., 2018. Reverse logistics and closed-loop supply chain of waste
electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE)/E-waste: a comprehensive litera-
ture review. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 137, 48–75.


Baldé, C.P., Forti, V., Gray, V., Kuehr, R., Stegmann, P., 2017. The Global E-waste
Monitor 2017 – Quantities, Flows, and Resources. United Nations University,
International Telecommunication Union, and International Solid Waste Associ-
ation.


Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., Kannan, D., 2015. Reverse logistics and closed-loop sup-
ply chain: a comprehensive review to explore the future. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 240,
603–626.


Dekker, R., Fleischmann, M.,  Inderfurth, K., van Wassenhove, L.N., 2013. Reverse
Logistics: Quantitative Models for Closed-Loop Supply Chains. Springer Science
&  Business Media.


Jerbia, R., Boujelben, M.K., Sehli, M.A., Jemai, Z., 2018. A stochastic Closed-Loop Sup-
ply Chain network design problem with multiple recovery options. Comput. Ind.
Eng. 118, 23–32.


Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., Palaniswami, M.,  2013. Internet of Things (IoT): a
vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Fut. Gen. Comput. Syst. 29,
1645–1660.


Hermann, M.,  Pentek, T., Otto, B., 2016. Design principles for Industrie 4.0 scenarios.
In: 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE,
pp.  3928–3937.


Zhong, R.Y., Xu, X., Klotz, E., Newman, S.T., 2017. Intelligent manufacturing in the
context of Industry 4.0: a review. Engineering 3, 616–630.


Helo, P., Suorsa, M.,  Hao, Y., Anussornnitisarn, P., 2014. Toward a cloud-based man-
ufacturing execution system for distributed manufacturing. Comput. Ind. 65,
646–656.


Bittencourt, L.F., Diaz-Montes, J., Buyya, R., Rana, O.F., Parashar, M., 2017. Mobility-
aware application scheduling in fog computing. IEEE Cloud Comput. 1, 26–35.


Jeschke, S., Brecher, C., Meisen, T., Özdemir, D., Eschert, T., 2017. Industrial Internet
of  Things and Cyber Manufacturing Systems. In: Industrial Internet of Things,
Springer, pp. 3–19.


Roberts, C.M., 2006. Radio frequency identification (RFID). Comput. Secur. 25, 18–26.
Bluetooth SIG, 2014. Bluetooth 4.0, 4.1 and 4.2 Specifications (accessed 28.10.18)


https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification.
LoRa Alliance, 2017. LoRaWAN v1.1 Specification (accessed 28.09.18) https://lora-


alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11.
Kneese, A.V., Ayres, R.U., d’Arge, R.C., 1971. Economics and the Environment: A


Materials Balance Approach. Routledge.
Genovese, A., Acquaye, A.A., Figueroa, A., Koh, S.L., 2017. Sustainable supply chain


management and the transition towards a circular economy: evidence and some
applications. Omega 66, 344–357.


Preston, F., 2012. A Global Redesign? Shaping the Circular Economy. Chatham House
London.


The  Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013. Towards the circular economy. J. Ind. Ecol.
2,  23–44.


Vella, K., 2016. The Circular Economy: An Investment with A Triple Win. https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-
economy-investment-triple-win en.


Sabbaghi, M.,  Esmaeilian, B., Mashhadi, A.R., Behdad, S., Cade, W.,  2015. An inves-
tigation of used electronics return flows: a data-driven approach to capture
and predict consumers storage and utilization behavior. Waste Manage. 36,
305–315.


Pei,  Z., Paswan, A., 2018. Consumers’ legitimate and opportunistic product return
behaviors in online shopping. J. Electron. Commerce Res. 19, 301–319.


European Parliament and Council, 2012. Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on Waste Electrical and Electronic
Equipment, WEEE. Off. J. Eur. Union L 197, 38–71.


European Commission, 2018. Communication from the Commission to the Euro-
pean Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee


and the Committee of the Regions on a Monitoring Framework for the Circular
Economy (accessed 19.02.19) https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25.


Eurostat, 2015. Your Key European Statistics: Circular Economy (accessed 19.02.19)
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy.


Farahani, S., Otieno, W.,  Barah, M., 2019. Environmentally friendly disposition deci-
sions for end-of-life electrical and electronic products: the case of computer
remanufacture. J. Clean. Prod. 224, 25–39.


Parker, D., Riley, K., Robinson, S., Symington, H., Tewson, J., Jansson, K., Ramkumar,
S.,  Peck, D., 2015. Remanufacturing Market Study.


Yang, X., Moore, P., Chong, S.K., 2009. Intelligent products: from lifecycle data acqui-
sition to enabling product-related services. Comput. Ind. 60, 184–194.


Garcia-Mui na, F., González-Sánchez, R., Ferrari, A., Settembre-Blundo, D., 2018. The
paradigms of Industry 4.0 and circular economy as enabling drivers for the com-
petitiveness of businesses and territories: the case of an Italian Ceramic Tiles
Manufacturing Company. Soc. Sci. 7, 255.


Asif, F.M., Roci, M.,  Lieder, M.,  Rashid, A., Štimulak, M.,  Halvordsson, E., de Bruijckere,
R.,  2018. A practical ICT framework for transition to circular manufacturing sys-
tems. Proc. CIRP 72, 598–602, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311,
51st  CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems.


Gu, F., Ma, B., Guo, J., Summers, P.A., Hall, P., 2017. Internet of things and Big Data as
potential solutions to the problems in Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
management: an exploratory study. Waste Manage. 68, 434–448.


De Toni, A., Tonchia, S., 2001. Performance measurement systems – models, charac-
teristics and measures. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manage. 21, 46–71.


Gunasekaran, A., Patel, C., Tirtiroglu, E., 2001. Performance measures and metrics in
a  Supply Chain environment. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manage. 21, 71–87.


Slack, N., Chambers, S., Johnston, R., 1995. Operations Management. Pearson Educa-
tion.


Rajeev, A., Pati, R.K., Padhi, S.S., Govindan, K., 2017. Evolution of sustainability in
supply chain management: a literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 162, 299–314.


Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W., 2004. Information systems in supply chain integration
and management. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 159, 269–295.


Srinivasan, R., Swink, M.,  2018. An investigation of visibility and flexibility as com-
plements to Supply Chain analytics: an organizational information processing
theory perspective. Prod. Oper. Manage. 27, 1849–1867.


Büyüközkan, G., Göç er, F., 2018. Digital Supply Chain: literature review and a pro-
posed framework for future research. Comput. Ind. 97, 157–177.


Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., 2017. A review of reverse logistics and closed-loop
supply chains: a Journal of Cleaner Production focus. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 371–384.


Lembke, R., Rogers, D., 2002. Differences between forward and reverse logistics in a
retail environment. Supply Chain Manage.: Int. J. 7, 271–282.


Ashton, K., 2009. That ‘Internet of Things’ thing. RFID J. 22, 97–114.
Da Xu, L., He, W.,  Li, S., 2014. Internet of Things in industries: A survey. IEEE Trans.


Ind.  Inform. 10, 2233–2243.
Boyes, H., Hallaq, B., Cunningham, J., Watson, T., 2018. The Industrial Internet of


Things (IIoT): an analysis framework. Comput. Ind. 101, 1–12.
Lu, Y., 2017. Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and open research


issues. J. Ind. Inform. Integr. 6, 1–10.
Lee, E.A., 2008. Cyber physical systems: design challenges. In: Object Oriented Real-


Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), 2008 11th IEEE International Symposium,
IEEE, pp. 363–369.


Lee, I., Lee, K., 2015. The Internet of Things (IoT): applications, investments, and
challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons 58, 431–440.


Lin, J., Yu, W.,  Zhang, N., Yang, X., Zhang, H., Zhao, W.,  2017. A survey on Inter-
net of Things: architecture, enabling technologies, security and privacy, and
applications. IEEE Internet Things J. 4, 1125–1142.


Siekkinen, M.,  Hiienkari, M.,  Nurminen, J.K., Nieminen, J., 2012. How low energy is
bluetooth low energy? Comparative measurements with Zigbee/802.15.4. In:
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW),
2012 IEEE, IEEE, pp. 232–237.


Dementyev, A., Hodges, S., Taylor, S., Smith, J., 2013. Power consumption analysis of
Bluetooth Low Energy, ZigBee and ANT sensor nodes in a cyclic sleep scenario.
In:  Wireless Symposium (IWS), 2013 IEEE International, IEEE, pp. 1–4.


Cho, K., Park, W.,  Hong, M.,  Park, G., Cho, W.,  Seo, J., Han, K., 2014. Analysis of latency
performance of bluetooth low energy (BLE) networks. Sensors 15, 59–78.


Rondón, R., Gidlund, M.,  Landernäs, K., 2017. Evaluating bluetooth low energy suit-
ability for time-critical industrial IoT applications. Int. J. Wirel. Inform. Netw. 24,
278–290.


Sanchez-Iborra, R., Sanchez-Gomez, J., Ballesta-Vi nas, J., Cano, M.D., Skarmeta, A.F.,
2018. Performance evaluation of LoRa considering scenario conditions. Sensors
18,  772.


Zorbas, D., Papadopoulos, G.Z., Maille, P., Montavont, N., Douligeris, C., 2018. Improv-
ing  LoRa network capacity using multiple spreading factor configurations. In:
2018 25th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), IEEE, pp.
516–520.


Cattani, M.,  Boano, C.A., Römer, K., 2017. An experimental evaluation of the reliability
of LoRa long-range low-power wireless communication. J. Sens. Actuator Netw.
6, 7.


Cuomo, F., Campo, M.,  Caponi, A., Bianchi, G., Rossini, G., Pisani, P., 2017. EXPLoRa:
extending the performance of LoRa by suitable spreading factor allocations. In:
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob),
IEEE, pp. 1–8.


Hofmann, E., Rüsch, M.,  2017. Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future
prospects on Logistics. Comput. Ind. 89, 23–34.



https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://lora-alliance.org/resource-hub/lorawantm-specification-v11

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vella/blog/circular-economy-investment-triple-win_en

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1516265440535&uri=COM:2018:29:FIN#footnote25

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.311




C. Garrido-Hidalgo, T. Olivares, F.J. Ramirez et al. / Computers in Industry 112 (2019) 103127 13


Castelo-Branco, I., Cruz-Jesus, F., Oliveira, T., 2019. Assessing Industry 4.0 readiness
in manufacturing: evidence for the European Union. Comput. Ind. 107, 22–32.


Gioia, E., Passaro, P., Petracca, M.,  2016. Amber: an advanced gateway solution to
support heterogeneous IoT technologies. In: 2016 24th International Conference
on  Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), IEEE, pp.
1–5.


Garrido-Hidalgo, C., Hortelano, D., Roda-Sanchez, L., Olivares, T., Ruiz, M.C., Lopez,
V.,  2018. IoT heterogeneous mesh network deployment for human-in-the-
loop challenges towards a social and sustainable Industry 4.0. IEEE Access 6,
28417–28437.


Roda-Sanchez, L., Garrido-Hidalgo, C., Hortelano, D., Olivares, T., Ruiz, M.C., 2018.
OperaBLE: an IoT-based wearable to improve efficiency and smart worker care
services in Industry 4.0. J. Sensors, 2018.


Tao, F., Qi, Q., 2017. New IT driven service-oriented Smart Manufacturing: frame-
work and characteristics. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man  Cybern. Syst.


Abdel-Basset, M.,  Manogaran, G., Mohamed, M.,  2018. Internet of Things (IoT) and
its  impact on supply chain: a framework for building smart, secure and efficient
systems. Fut. Gen. Comput. Syst.


Papert, M.,  Pflaum, A., 2017. Development of an ecosystem model for the realiza-
tion  of Internet of Things (IoT) services in supply chain management. Electron.
Markets 27, 175–189.


Wakenshaw, S., 2017. An IoT-enabled Supply Chain Integration Framework: Empir-
ical  Case Studies.


Tao, M., Zuo, J., Liu, Z., Castiglione, A., Palmieri, F., 2018. Multi-layer cloud architec-
tural model and ontology-based security service framework for IoT-based smart
homes. Fut. Gen. Comput. Syst. 78, 1040–1051.


ISO, 2016. ISO/IEC 20922:2016-Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)
v3.1.1 (accessed 01.05.18) https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html.


NFC, 2017. Near Field Communication Technology Standards (accessed 29.01.19)
http://nearfieldcommunication.org.


Wi-Fi Alliance, 2019. Wi-Fi Certified (accessed 29.01.19) https://www.wi-fi.org/.
ZigBee Alliance, 2019. ZigBee Alliance (accessed 29.01.19) https://www.zigbee.org.
LoRa Alliance, 2018. https://lora-alliance.org/ (accessed 30.04.18).


NB-IoT, 2016. NB-IoT Standardized (accessed 17.03.18) http://www.3gpp.org/news-
events/3gpp-news/1785-nb iot complete.


Sigfox, 2019. Sigfox, The World’s Leading IoT Connectivity Service (accessed
27.01.19) https://www.sigfox.com/.


The Things Network, 2019. Building a Global Internet of Things Network Together
(accessed 26.01.19) https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/.


Amazon Web  Services, 2019. Amazon Web  Services (accessed 26.01.19) https://aws.
amazon.com/.


ElMahgoub, K., 2014. An Encryption Algorithm for Secured Communication with
Passive UHF RFID Systems.


Gurijala, Y.R., 2017. Performance Testing Internet of Things (accessed 26.09.18)
https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/
Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf.


ETSI, 2013. European Telecommunication Standards Institute: Compliance of
the  SX1272/3 LoRa Modem (accessed 30.07.18) https://www.semtech.com/
uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf.


Karasiewicz, C., 2013. Why  HTTP is Not Enough for the Internet of Things
(accessed 01.12.18) https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/
mobileblog/entry/why http is not enough for the internet of things?lang=en.


Nordic Semiconductors, 2018. Cross Platform Bluetooth Low Energy Development
Software (accessed 11.09.18) https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/
Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop.


Semtech, 2013. SX1272/3/6/7/8: LoRa Modem. Semtech (accessed 19.09.18).
The Things Network, 2018. TTN Fair Access: Limitations on Data Rate, Packet


Size and Time on Air (accessed 27.01.19) https://www.thethingsnetwork.
org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-
messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/.


The Things Network, 2018. TTN Mapper (accessed 12.02.18) https://ttnmapper.org/
.


Semtech, 2017. LoRa Module Implementation by Semtech
(accessed 12.02.18) http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC Answers
Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK.



https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

https://www.iso.org/standard/69466.html

http://nearfieldcommunication.org

http://nearfieldcommunication.org

http://nearfieldcommunication.org

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.wi-fi.org/

https://www.zigbee.org

https://www.zigbee.org

https://www.zigbee.org

https://www.zigbee.org

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1785-nb_iot_complete

https://www.sigfox.com/

https://www.sigfox.com/

https://www.sigfox.com/

https://www.sigfox.com/

https://www.sigfox.com/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/

https://aws.amazon.com/

https://aws.amazon.com/

https://aws.amazon.com/

https://aws.amazon.com/

https://aws.amazon.com/

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.infosys.com/IT-services/validation-solutions/features-opinions/Documents/performance-testing-iot.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/etsi-compliance-sx1272-lora-modem.pdf

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/blogs/mobileblog/entry/why_http_is_not_enough_for_the_internet_of_things?lang=en

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Connect-for-Desktop

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/t/limitations-data-rate-packet-size-30-seconds-uplink-and-10-messages-downlink-per-day-fair-access-policy/

https://ttnmapper.org/

https://ttnmapper.org/

https://ttnmapper.org/

https://ttnmapper.org/

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK

http://semtech.force.com/lora/LC_Answers_Questions?id=90644000000PmGvAAK


