









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Computers & Industrial Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/caie


An adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system to supply chain
performance evaluation based on SCOR® metrics
Francisco Rodrigues Lima-Juniora, Luiz Cesar Ribeiro Carpinettib,⁎
a Department of Management and Economics, University: Federal Technological University of Paraná, Av. Sete de Setembro, 3165, Rebouças, 80230-901 Curitiba, Paraná,
Brazil
b Production Engineering Department, University: São Carlos School of Engineering – University of São Paulo, Av. Trabalhador São-Carlense, 400, Parque Arnold Schimidt,
13566-590 São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Supply chain performance evaluation
SCOR® model
ANFIS
Neuro-fuzzy systems
Supply chain management


A B S T R A C T


Evaluating the performance of supply chains (SC) is a critical activity to enhance the outcomes of operations
along the SC tiers. In order to support this evaluation process, several studies have proposed the application of
artificial intelligence techniques combined with the performance metrics suggested by the SCOR®model (Supply
Chain Operations Reference). However these propositions present some limitations. While the systems based on
Mamdani fuzzy inference do not allow adaptation to the environment of use based on historical performance
data, the systems based on artificial neural networks are not adequate to deal with imprecise data and qualitative
metrics. In order to overcome these limitations, this paper presents a new approach to support SC performance
evaluation based on the combination between the SCOR® metrics with an adaptive network-based fuzzy in-
ference systems (ANFIS). In total, 56 candidate topologies were implemented and assessed using MATLAB. The
random subsampling cross-validation method was applied to select the most appropriate topological parameters
for each ANFIS model. The mean square error between the target values and the values estimated by each ANFIS
model demonstrate its greater accuracy of prediction. In addition, results of the hypothesis tests based on paired
samples indicate that the proposed ANFIS models are adequate to support SC performance evaluation. The
proposed system can help managers to develop improvement actions plans based on the outcomes of the eva-
luation process. When compared to previous approaches, it presents advantages such as greater accuracy of
prediction, learning ability based on historical data, suitability to support decision making under uncertainty,
better interpretability of results, among others.


1. Introduction


Supply chain management (SCM) has become a critical issue for any
company seeking global growth and profitability (Lakri, Dallery, &
Jemai, 2015). A supply chain can be seen as a set of integrated business
processes that encompass all activities related to the flow and trans-
formation of goods, from the raw material stage to the delivery of the
final product to the end customer (Handfield & Nichols, 1999). SCM
involves establishing strategic partnership with suppliers and custo-
mers, long-term relationships, sharing information, and work together
to improve products and processes (Qi, Huo, Wang, & Yeung, 2017). As
a result, it can bring advantages such as reduction of inventory, im-
provement on the use of resources, greater customer satisfaction,
among others (Ko, Tiwari, & Mehnen, 2010; Chorfi, Benabbou, &
Berrado, 2018). Therefore, measuring supply chain performance in
order to assess effectiveness of SCM strategies and practices has become


even more important (Chorfi et al., 2018; Lakri et al., 2015).
Evaluating supply chain performance requires the adoption of a set


of financial and non-financial metrics related to processes that cross
member companies (SCC, 2012). Over the last two decades, a large
variety of studies on supply chain performance evaluation have been
proposed, including case studies (Sundarakani, Razzak, & Manikandan,
2018), surveys about the most frequently applied metrics, literature
reviews (Najmi, Gholamian, & Makui, 2013; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti,
2017; Guersola, Lima, & Steiner, 2018), tools to select performance
metrics (Osiro, Lima-Junior, & Carpinetti, 2018), conceptual frame-
works (Lakri et al., 2015) and quantitative models for supply chain
performance measurement (Akkawuttiwanich & Yenradee, 2018).
Faced with the need to make rational and more automated decisions,
quantitative models have received special attention by researchers and
practitioners in recent years. In general, these models apply multi-
criteria decision making methods, statistical or artificial intelligence


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106191
Received 30 May 2019; Received in revised form 10 October 2019; Accepted 17 November 2019


⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: carpinet@sc.usp.br (L.C.R. Carpinetti).



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03608352

















https://www.elsevier.com/locate/caie

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106191

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106191

mailto:carpinet@sc.usp.br

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106191

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.cie.2019.106191&domain=pdf




(AI) techniques to estimate the supply chain performance based on
multiple measures (Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2017). Desirable features
of these models comprise: adoption of leading and lagging metrics re-
lated to different aspects of SCM (Elgazzar, Tipi, & Jones, 2019); ability
to deal with qualitative metrics and decision making processes under
uncertainty (Najmi et al., 2013); learning capacity to adapt to the en-
vironment of use (Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2017); and compatibility of
metrics to support benchmarking between global supply chains
(Elgazzar et al., 2019).


Akyuz and Erkan (2010) reviewed 24 studies on supply chain per-
formance measurement published on relevant journals. In addition to
suggesting some requirements for performance metrics, they have
highlighted the significance of the SCOR® (Supply Chain Operations
Reference) model to support the development of systems for supply
chain performance evaluation. Najmi et al. (2013) reviewed 42 papers
published from 1998 to 2010 on supply chain performance measure-
ment; they pointed out that AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process) and DEA
(Data Envelopment Analysis) are the most applied decision making
methods, while metrics related to cost, customer, and internal process
are the most popular. In another literature review study, Guersola et al.
(2018) analysed about 100 papers published between 1999 and 2014,
including theoretical studies and models for supply chain performance
measurement. These authors also concluded that the most used tech-
niques are AHP and DEA, followed by techniques based on fuzzy logic.
However, despite the large number of proposed models, these authors
highlight that few of them have been validated using appropriated
approaches. Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2017) identified 84 supply
chain performance evaluation models published in journals from 2003
to 2015. They concluded that more than half of the models are based on
multicriteria decision making techniques, while only 11 studies
adopted AI techniques in order to add new intelligent abilities into
performance measurement systems. Similarly to the results presented
by Guersola et al. (2018), Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2017) pointed
out that only 33.3% of the studies have applied a validation approach
such as statistical tests or sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effective-
ness of the obtained results. Therefore, although these supply chain
performance evaluation models have brought several significant con-
tributions to SCM, most of them suffer from some limitations such as:


(1) They do not support comparative assessments of performance re-
sults against other global supply chains, because they make use of a
specific set of metrics generally chosen by experts or selected from
previous studies (Didehkhani, Jassbi, & Pilevari, 2009; Jassbi,
Seyedhosseini, & Pilevari, 2010; Wang, 2013);


(2) Since some performance metrics are calculated using nonlinear
expressions, it is necessary to adopt techniques able to quantita-
tively model nonlinear causal relationships between input and
output metrics. However, most of the quantitative models for
supply chain performance evaluation are not suitable for this pur-
pose, since many of them are based on multicriteria decision
making techniques that make a weighted linear combination be-
tween the input data to produce the output values
(Akkawuttiwanich & Yenradee, 2018; Bukhori, Widodo, &
Ismoyowati, 2015; Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009; Jalalvand,
Teimoury, Makui, Aryanezhad, & Jolai, 2011; Kocaoglu, Gülsün, &
Tanya, 2013; Moharamkhani, Bozorgi-Amiri, & Mina, 2017;
Sellitto, Pereira, Borchardt, Silva, & Viegas, 2015;
Theeranuphattana & Tang, 2008; Yang & Jiang, 2012). This ap-
proach is often appropriate for problems involving selection, or-
dering, and categorization of alternatives, but is not suitable for
performance prediction problems, since the output variables re-
present specific performance measures that are derived from spe-
cific equations;


(3) Another desirable feature of a supply chain performance evaluation
system is the ability to incorporate performance metrics already
used by the companies, holding the cause and effect relationships


between them, which avoids that measures need to be modified due
to the deployment of this new system (Melnyk, Stewart, & Swink,
2004). Thus, it is convenient to adopt artificial intelligence tech-
niques that have the ability to learn the cause and effect relation-
ships from historical performance data, which becomes even more
necessary given the trend of increasing data availability due to the
use of data management technologies such as big data (Büyüközkan
& Göçer, 2018). It is worth to note that supply chain performance
evaluation models based on multicriteria methods and mathema-
tical programming methods do not present learning ability
(Theeranuphattana & Tang, 2008; Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009;
Jalalvand et al., 2011; Bai, Sarkis, Wei, & Koh, 2012; Clivillé &
Berrah, 2012; Yang & Jiang, 2012; Kocaoglu et al., 2013; Zhang &
Reimann, 2014; Bukhori et al., 2015; Sellitto et al., 2015;
Moharamkhani et al., 2017), which makes them unsuitable to adapt
themselves to a particular environment of use.


Among the studies found in the literature reviewed, only the supply
chain performance evaluation systems proposed by Ganga and
Carpinetti (2011), and Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2019) do not pre-
sent these drawbacks. These three studies combine the performance
metrics proposed by the SCOR® model with AI techniques in order to
make predictive evaluation systems. In the model developed by Ganga
and Carpinetti (2011), a set of fuzzy inference rules are used to re-
present the cause-and-effect relationships implicit among the SCOR®
metrics, which permit to predict performance figures of lagging metrics.
Another advantage of using the SCOR® metrics is to compatibility of
metrics to carry out benchmarking among global supply chains by
means of the SCORmark database (SCC, 2012). However, as the fuzzy
inference systems proposed by Ganga and Carpinetti (2011) require
collecting the opinion of experts to tune hundreds of inference rules,
they are not able to adjust the relationships among the metrics using
historical performance data. Another drawback is that choosing and
updating the system parameters based on the experts’ opinion is very
time-consuming. Regarding the multilayer perceptron neural network-
based models proposed by Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2019), although
it enables adjusting the system to the environment of use by means of
historical performance data, it does not seem appropriate to support
decision making processes under uncertainty. Since these models re-
present and process information from input and output variables using
crisp values, they do not have any procedure to deal with the sub-
jectivity of decision makers, qualitative metrics, or imprecise data.


On the other hand, neuro-fuzzy systems bring together supervised
learning and decisions under uncertainty, advantages of neural and
fuzzy systems respectively. Therefore, this paper proposes a new supply
chain performance evaluation system based on neuro-fuzzy systems of
the ANFIS type to predict the performance figures of SCOR® level-1
metrics based on the values of level-2 metrics. In total, 56 computa-
tional models were implemented and assessed using the random sub-
sampling cross-validation method so as to choose the topologies that
present higher accuracy of prediction. Statistical experiments using
hypothesis tests were performed to check if there are significant sta-
tistical differences between the data predicted by the ANFIS models and
the expected values for each metric. Following this introduction,
Section 2 reviews the literature about supply chain management,
supply chain performance evaluation, and the SCOR® model. Section 3
details the fundamentals on modelling, training, and validation of
ANFIS. Section 4 presents the proposal system, while Section 5 details
an illustrative application. Section 6 focuses on the validation of the
results based on hypothesis tests. Lastly, Section 7 presents the con-
clusions and recommendations for further works.


2. Supply chain management


The literature presents several definitions regarding the concept of
supply chain management (SCM). In a seminal review study about this


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






issue, Mentzer et al. (2001) define supply chain management as “the
systemic, strategic coordination of the traditional business functions
and the tactics across these business functions within a particular
company and across businesses within the supply chain, for the pur-
poses of improving the long-term performance of the individual com-
panies and the supply chain as a whole”. Büyüközkan and Göçer (2018)
point out that traditional supply chain has a lack of certain attributes
that are needed in today's and tomorrow's business requirements. Thus,
faced with the need to consider new business requirements, the con-
cepts of supply chain and supply chain management have evolved over
the last decades.


In the last decades, the concepts and practices of sustainable supply
chain management have gained the attention of academics and prac-
titioners (Dubey et al., 2017). Seuring and Müller (2008) conceptualizes
sustainable supply chain management as “the management of material,
information and capital flows as well as cooperation among companies
along the supply chain while taking goals from all three dimensions of
sustainable development, i.e. economic, environmental and social, into
account which are derived from customer and stakeholder require-
ments”. While there is no single definition of sustainable supply chain
management, existing definitions promote environmental, economic,
and social sustainability along the supply chain members aiming for
long-term growth (Dubey et al., 2017).


More recently, in the face of changes related to industry 4.0 such as
digitalization, virtualization, interoperability, and autonomous deci-
sion-making, the concepts of digital supply chain and supply chain 4.0
emerged (Makris, Hansen, & Khan, 2019). According to Büyüközkan
and Göçer (2018), digital supply chain “is an intelligent best-fit tech-
nological system that is based on the capability of massive data disposal
and excellent cooperation and communication for digital hardware,
software, and networks to support and synchronize interaction between
organizations by making services more valuable, accessible and af-
fordable with consistent, agile and effective outcomes”. Makris et al.
(2019) defines Supply Chain 4.0 as “a supply chain which involves close
collaboration of different stakeholders (e.g. suppliers and customers)
and is built on digital technology, including but not limited to, we-
benabled technology, cloud computing and the Internet of Things”.
Although there are different terminologies in use in the literature,
Makris et al. (2019) highlight that the terms digital supply chain and
supply chain 4.0 are often employed interchangeably.


Managing supply chain requires decision making that influence the
outcomes in the operational, tactical and strategic levels (Gunasekaran,
Patel, & Mcgaughey, 2004; Melnyk et al., 2004). Such management
often involves professionals of purchasing and supply management,
quality managers, logistic managers, engineers, among others, who act
as decision makers (Bals, Schulze, Kelly, & Stek, 2019). Thus, evalu-
ating the performance achieved as a consequence of these decisions is
an essential activity to support the supply chain management
(Gunasekaran, Patel, & Tirtiroglu, 2001).


2.1. Supply chain performance evaluation


Beamon (1999) conceptualizes supply chain performance as “the
evaluation of supply chain management, including resources, output,
and flexibility factors”. For Chopra and Meindl (2013), supply chain
performance is “the result of how supply chain is managed and how
well the logistical drivers (facilities, inventory, transportation) and
cross functional drivers (information, sourcing and pricing) interact
together to determine the level of performance in terms of supply
chain’s responsiveness and efficiency”. Based on SCC (2012), supply
chain performance is defined in this study as the performance outcomes
of processes of supply chain member companies regarding measures
related to reliability, cost, responsiveness, agility, and asset manage-
ment.


According to Melnyk, Narasimhan, and Decampos (2014), mana-
ging supply chain performance involves evaluation of the differences


among actual and desired outcomes to identify and flag those perfor-
mance gaps that are critical. It is also necessary understanding the root
causes as well as implementing and monitoring improvement action
plans. The adoption of performance evaluation systems is frequently
recommended to facilitate implementation of strategies to improve
supply chain performance (Melnyk et al., 2014; Qi et al., 2017).
Elgazzar et al. (2019) claim that choosing adequate performance me-
trics may drive managers allocate resources to the most relevant im-
provement actions. These authors also highlight that it is essential to
adopt metrics that allow evaluation of supply chain performance from
different perspectives in order to afford a balanced assessment as well
as to set performance targets to reflect a company’s strategy and ob-
jectives. However, most firms failed in developing a system providing a
clear portrait of supply chain performance and supporting elaboration
of action plans (Lakri et al., 2015).


Metrics adopted for supply chain performance evaluation influence
decision making at strategic, tactical, and operational levels
(Gunasekaran et al., 2001; Melnyk et al., 2004). The strategic level
measures are related to the top level management decisions, very often
reflecting “investigation of broad based policies, corporate financial
plans, competitiveness and level of adherence to organizational goals”
(Gunasekaran et al., 2004). Strategic level measures encompass metrics
regarding quality level, order lead time, total cash flow time, cost
saving initiatives and lead time against industry standards. The tactical
level involves decisions related to resource allocation and performance
evaluation against targets in order to attain outcomes specified at the
strategic level. Tactical level metrics comprise order cycle time, cash
flow and capacity flexibility. In the operational level, performance
evaluation requires precise data to measure the outcomes of decisions
of low level managers. Performance evaluation of operational level
includes measures regarding human resource productivity, percentage
of defects, quality of delivered goods, on time delivery of goods, de-
livery reliability performance. Managers and workers must set opera-
tional objectives, which if achieved will carry out to accomplishment of
tactical goals (Gunasekaran et al., 2001, 2004).


Elgazzar et al. (2019) classified several studies that propose supply
chain performance measurement systems. Based on the analysis of their
main scope, tools, measures and practical implications provided, they
subdivided the studies into four categories: process-focused systems,
prioritization frameworks, causal systems, and integration frameworks.
Process-focused systems can be used to identify processes that need
improvement and then link corresponding measures to goals. Prior-
itisation frameworks are designed to identify measures that are below
targets and attention. Causality systems may be adopted to assess the
impact of enablers on the supply chain performance as well predict
performance based on the quantitative relationships among the input
and output metrics. Additionally, an integration framework can be
applied to embed new functions in the supply chain performance
measurement systems, such as connecting metrics to strategy (Elgazzar
et al., 2019).


Few studies in the literature propose quantitative forward-looking
(predictive) performance evaluation systems (Unahabhokha, Platts, &
Tan, 2007). Melnyk et al. (2004) point out that the use of systems based
predictive metrics is suitable when the objective is in preventing the
occurrence of problems, rather than correcting them. Among the 84
quantitative models for supply chain performance evaluation analyzed
by Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2017), only 4 support the prediction of
performance (Didehkhani et al., 2009; Fan, Zhang, Wang, Yang, &
Hapeshi, 2013; Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011; Jassbi et al., 2010). In this
type of system, the outcome of some measures (lagging metrics) are the
consequence of some others (leading metrics) (Unahabhokha et al.,
2007; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019). According to Unahabhokha
et al. (2007), a leading metric “is an indicator that measures the drivers
of future performance”, whereas a lagging metric “is an indicator that
measures the output of success of past activity”. In general, supply
chain performance prediction systems are based on artificial


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






















intelligence methods that maps the mathematical expressions aiming to
quantify the causal relationships between the input and output metrics
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2017). It is made by using supervised
learning algorithms (Didehkhani et al., 2009; Fan et al., 2013; Jassbi
et al., 2010) or fuzzy inference rules tuned by specialists' judgments
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011). Thus, the use of supply chain performance
prediction systems allows managers to estimate the values of lagging
metrics and to compare them against performance target or standards
in order to detect performance gaps and then develop reactive action
plans (Unahabhokha et al., 2007; Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011; Lima-
Junior & Carpinetti, 2019).


In our review, we identified just two prediction systems based on
neuro-fuzzy systems. According to Ko et al. (2010), benefits of em-
ploying artificial intelligence techniques such as neuro-fuzzy systems
include the “capability to deal with imprecision, uncertainty, and par-
tial truth to achieve tractability and robustness on simulating human
decision making behavior with low cost”. Kar, Das, and Ghosh (2014)
highlight the ability to explore interpretable decision rules. Another
advantage is the self-adaptive ability to learn from experience as well as
to generalize results from sample data (Ko et al., 2010). Didehkhani
et al. (2009) proposed a neuro-fuzzy model to predict supply chain
flexibility, which was applied in an automotive enterprise. Jassbi et al.
(2010) developed a neuro-fuzzy system to predict supply chain agility
and applied them in a leading car manufacturing in Iran. In both stu-
dies, some experiments using hypothesis tests were carried out aiming
to check if there was a significant statistical difference between the
values predicted and the performance figures for each company. De-
spite the contributions of these studies to the literature on SCM, these
models estimate performance figures of just one output metric. In ad-
dition, since they use a set of measures limited to the evaluation of a
single performance dimension, these models are not adequate to sup-
port a broad and balanced evaluation of supply chain performance.


Fan et al. (2013) developed a supply chain performance prediction
system based on the combination of 5 Dimensional Balanced Scorecard
with Levenberg–Marquardt backpropagation neural network. Wang
(2013) proposes a predictive system based on a new neural network
algorithm to evaluate supply chain performance of fresh agricultural
products. Similarly to Didehkhani et al. (2009) and Jassbi et al. (2010),
Fan et al. (2013) and Wang (2013) makes use of a specific set of
measures defined by experts or chosen from previous studies. Thus, the
performance metrics adopted by these studies are not compatible to
benchmark the performance values obtained by a focus company
against of other companies within a global supply chains. An approach
to overcome these limitations is by using the metrics suggested by the
SCOR® model combined with neuro-fuzzy systems. However, in the
reviewed literature, there are no predictive performance evaluation
systems based on such an approach.


2.2. SCOR® model


The SCOR® model was proposed by the Supply Chain Council in
order to link business processes, best practices, performance metrics,
people, and technology into a unified structure (SCC, 2012; Chorfi
et al., 2018). It defines a practice as a unique way of configuration of a
process or activity and categorizes the practices as emerging, best


practices, standard practices and declining practices (SCC, 2012). The
SCOR® model allows describing the way the processes interact along a
supply chain and how they are set from a supplier’s supplier to a cus-
tomer’s customer, which enables practitioners to identify the features
that contribute to client satisfaction (Ntabe, LeBel, Munson, & Santa-
Eulalia, 2015). It has been universally recognized and widely applied in
industry, since a common reference model allows companies to com-
municate using a common terminology that is understandable within
and across organizations (Akkawuttiwanich & Yenradee, 2018). SCOR®
is well suited to support tactical and operational management for the
implementation of strategic planning decision-making (Estampe,
Lamouri, Paris, & Brahim-Djelloul, 2013).


As shown in Table 1, the SCOR® model suggests five attributes to
manage the supply chain performance, named reliability, responsive-
ness, agility, assets, and costs (SCC, 2012). The first three attributes are
customer-focused, dealing with the effectiveness of the supply chain
processes, whereas the others are internally-focused attributes, dealing
with efficiency (Chorfi et al., 2018). These attributes should be adopted
to establish a strategic direction (SCC, 2012). In order to measure the
success of the implementation of these strategies, the SCOR® model
proposes the use of some performance metrics associated to each at-
tribute, which are arranged in three hierarchical levels. Fig. 1 illustrates
the performance metrics of levels 1 and 2. Level-2 metrics serve as di-
agnostics to identify the root cause of performance gaps of level-1
metrics (SCC, 2012). Similarly, level-3 performance metrics may be
used to diagnose level-2 metrics. The SCOR® model reinforces that this
performance diagnosis is an important activity that helps in identifying
the processes that need further investigation and improvement action.


In addition to the diagnostic of performance based on causal re-
lationships, the adoption of the SCOR®metrics enables a focus company
to compare their performance results against of other global supply
chains. A tool called SCORmark, which contains performance figures of
over 1,000 companies and 2,000 supply chains, is able to support this
benchmarking process. This tool allows three types of analysis, in-
cluding monitoring and comparison of performance measures on a
historical basis, external benchmarking, and comparative analysis be-
tween firms of the same group. To carry out benchmarking using
SCORmark, managers should track the following steps (APICS, 2018):
identify supply chain(s); determine strategic objectives; select metrics;
source/collect data; submit data; data validation; and receive final re-
port. Application of the SCORmark brings benefits that comprise
identification of performance gaps; setting of performance goals; and
helping in the formulation company-specific roadmaps aiming to en-
hance performance outcomes (SCC, 2012; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti,
2019).


Several applications based on the SCOR® model have been made to
deal with problems related to supply chain management. Ntabe et al.
(2015) review 45 applications of the SCOR® model published between
2000 and 2012. They concluded that this model is not only appro-
priated to supply chain financial performance assessment, but it is also
a useful decision support tool for environmental performance evalua-
tion along the chain supply. Delipinar and Kocaoglu (2016) identified
27 studies published from 2006 to 2014 that present applications of the
SCOR® model, including case studies and mathematical models. These
authors reinforce its appropriateness to deal with process modelling


Table 1
Performance attributes suggested by the SCOR® model.
Attribute Description


Reliability “The ability to perform tasks as expected. Reliability focuses on the predictability of the outcome of a process.”
Responsiveness “The speed at which tasks are performed. The speed at which a supply chain provides products to the customer.”
Agility “The ability to respond to external influences, the ability to respond to marketplace changes to gain or maintain competitive advantage.”
Assets “The ability to efficiently utilize assets. Asset management strategies in a supply chain include inventory reduction and in-sourcing vs. outsourcing.”
Costs “The costs of operating the supply chain processes. This includes labor costs, material costs, management and transportation costs.”


Source: SCC (2012).


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti


































and performance measurement. Based on the results of a literature re-
view on supply chain performance evaluation, Guersola et al. (2018)
have also recommend using the SCOR® model to support development
of new measurement systems.


Table 2 briefly describes the studies found in the literature that
propose quantitative models for supply chain performance evaluation
based on the SCOR® metrics. There are few models that use mathe-
matical programming methods, such as DEA (Jalalvand et al., 2011; Liu
& Liu, 2017), integer programming and multi-objective optimization
(Zhang & Reimann, 2014). Artificial intelligence techniques as fuzzy
inference systems (Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011) and multilayer percep-
tron neural networks (Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019) have also been
proposed. There is a predominance traditional multicriteria decision
making methods such as AHP (Bukhori et al., 2015; Dissanayake &
Cross, 2018; Kocaoglu et al., 2013; Sellitto et al., 2015), MACBETH
(Clivillé & Berrah, 2012), PROMETHEE (Jalalvand et al., 2011), and
TOPSIS (Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009; Kocaoglu et al., 2013). How-
ever, multicriteria models based on pairwise comparisons between
fuzzy numbers (Theeranuphattana & Tang, 2008; Yang and Jiang,
2012) and hybrid decision methods such as interval-valued Fuzzy
TOPSIS (Moharamkhani et al., 2017) and Fuzzy QFD (Akkawuttiwanich
& Yenradee, 2018) have also been reported.


Although the models showed in Table 1 have brought various
contributions to the advancement of the literature and practice on
performance evaluation of supply chains, they present some limitations
related to the techniques adopted. In the case of the approaches based
on pairwise judgments from experts proposed by Theeranuphattana and
Tang (2008), Clivillé and Berrah (2012), Yang and Jiang (2012),
Kocaoglu et al. (2013), Bukhori et al. (2015), Sellitto et al. (2015), and
Dissanayake and Cross (2018), lack of consistency of judgments is a
problem. Moreover, the use of these approaches can limit the number of
metrics and supply chains considered in the evaluation process. An-
other problem is that, as the models based on multicriteria methods
(Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009; Kocaoglu et al., 2013; Moharamkhani
et al., 2017; Akkawuttiwanich & Yenradee, 2018) produce an output
value based on a weighted linear combination of inputs, they are not
adequate to deal with non-linear causal relationships between the
SCOR® level-1 and level-2 metrics. It is worth to note that only models
based on artificial intelligence techniques (Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011;
Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019) present this ability. However, the
models based on Mamdani fuzzy inference (Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)
need manual tuning and updating of hundreds of decisions rules based


on specialists opinion. Even though neural network-based models
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019) enables adjusting of topological
parameters based on historical performance data, they are not able to
deal with qualitative variables and imprecise data. Thus, adoption of
ANFIS neuro-fuzzy systems in combination with SCOR® metrics permits
to bring together the advantages from neural networks and fuzzy in-
ference systems in order to overcome these limitations.


3. Adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system


There are different computational methods that combine abilities of
fuzzy systems with artificial neural networks, which are generically
called neuro-fuzzy systems (Kar et al., 2014; Rajab & Sharma, 2018).
Jang (1993) proposed the most popular type of neuro-fuzzy system,
named Adaptive Network-based Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). In
order to approximate the human reasoning way, ANFIS combines the
architecture of Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference systems with the su-
pervised learning ability from radial basis function neural network. The
use of fuzzy sets and decision rules enables neuro-fuzzy systems to deal
with “impreciseness of input data and domain knowledge and also al-
lows quick and often sufficiently good approximations of desired so-
lutions” (Ko et al., 2010). Such characteristics contribute to the high
performance of this type of intelligent system in problems involving
function approximation, pattern classification, real-time applications,
among others (Kar et al., 2014; Rajab & Sharma, 2018). In a literature
review study, Kar et al. (2014) identified dozens of applications of
neuro-fuzzy systems in economic systems, manufacturing, electrical
and electronic systems, traffic control, image processing and medical
systems. Rajab and Sharma (2018) presented a review study focused on
neuro-fuzzy applications in business. These authors have identified
several ANFIS-based models to support decision making problems in
areas such as finance, business planning, marketing, production and
operations, human resource management and information systems.


As shown in Fig. 2, the architecture of an ANFIS is composed of five
layers. The nodes within the same layer perform similar tasks. Nodes
represented by circles are called fixed nodes while those represented by
squares are denoted adaptive nodes. The outputs of adaptive nodes
depend on modifiable parameters within each node, which are tuned
using a set of sample values in the training stage of the model (Jang,
1993; Özkan & Inal, 2014). Unlike artificial neural network models,
connections between the nodes of different layers do not present sy-
naptic weights. As in traditional fuzzy inference systems, a type of


Fig. 1. Level 1 and 2 metrics proposed by the SCOR® model.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






Table 2
Brief description of the performance evaluation models based on SCOR® metrics.
Authors Method(s) Proposal Metrics


Theeranuphattana and Tang
(2008)


Pairwise comparisons between
fuzzy numbers


A conceptual model of performance
measurement for supply chains.


Adopts some SCOR® level-2 metrics as subcriteria and the
performance attributes proposed by SCOR® as criteria. It
proposes the use of an overall supply chain performance
index as output variable.


Golparvar and Seifbarghy
(2009)


TOPSIS (Technique for Order of
Preference by Similarity to Ideal
Solution)


Application of SCOR® model to analyse the
supply chain of oil-producing company.


Uses the performance attributes proposed by SCOR® as
metrics to select projects in order to improve the
performance supply chain.


Ganga and Carpinetti (2011) Mamdani fuzzy inference An approach based on fuzzy rules decision to
predict supply chain performance.


Utilizes some SCOR® level-2 metrics to predict the
performance figures of the level-1 metrics.


Jalalvand et al. (2011) DEA (Data envelopment analysis)
and PROMETHEE II


A method to compare supply chains of an
industry.


Adopts some level-2 metrics to estimate the values of the
level-1 metrics related to the process Plan, Source, Make,
and Deliver.


Clivillé and Berrah (2012) MACBETH (Measuring
Attractiveness by a Categorical
Based Evaluation Technique)


A model to quantify overall performance of a
supply chain.


Proposes the use of some particular metrics not extracted
from SCOR®, which have been linked to the processes Plan,
Source, Make, Deliver, and Return. It also proposes the use
of an overall supply chain performance measure.


Yang and Jiang (2012) New method based on fuzzy
numbers and M(1,2,3)


Fuzzy evaluation on supply chains’ overall
performance based on analytic hierarchical
model


Aggregate the values of some of the level-1 SCOR® metrics
to estimate a measure of overall supply chain performance
proposed by the authors.


Kocaoglu et al. (2013) AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process)
and TOPSIS


A SCOR® based approach for evaluating supply
chain performance


Applies some of the metrics of levels 1 and 2 to estimate the
“supply chain performance efficiency”.


Zhang and Reimann (2014) Integer programming and multi-
objective optimization


Multi-objective performance assessment and
optimization of a multi-period two-echelon
supply chain.


Utilizes the performance attributes Costs, Agility, Assets,
and Reliability as variables of a mathematical programming
model.


Bukhori et al. (2015) AHP Evaluation of poultry supply chain
performance in XYZ Slaughtering House
Yogyakarta.


Adopts some of the level-1 metrics related to the attributes
Reliability, Responsiveness, Flexibility, and Costs.


Sellitto et al. (2015) AHP Performance assessment model in the footwear
industry.


Applies a set particular of metrics not extracted from
SCOR®, which have been linked to the processes and
attributes proposed by SCOR®.


Moharamkhani et al. (2017) Interval-valued Fuzzy TOPSIS Supply chain performance evaluation based on
the combination between SCOR® metrics and
interval-valued fuzzy TOPSIS.


Adopts the performance attributes proposed by SCOR® as
metrics to rank supply chains based on their overall
performance.


Liu and Liu (2017) DEA A methodology to assess the supply chain
performance based on gap-based measures.


Utilizes a set particular of metrics not extracted from
SCOR®, which have been linked to the processes Plan,
Source, and Make.


Akkawuttiwanich and
Yenradee (2018)


Fuzzy QFD (Quality Function
Deployment)


An approach to manage key performance
indicators of the SCOR® model for
performance improvements.


Adopts some level 1 and 2 metrics related to the attributes
Reliability, Responsiveness, Agility, Costs, and Assets.


Dissanayake and Cross
(2018)


AHP and structural equations
modelling


Systematic mechanism for identifying the
relative impact of supply chain performance
areas on the overall supply chain performance.


Applies a set particular of metrics not extracted from
SCOR®, which have been linked to the attributes Reliability,
Responsiveness, Agility, and Asset Management.


Lima-Junior and Carpinetti
(2019)


Multilayer perceptron neural
networks


An intelligent system for performance
prediction of SCOR® level-1 metrics based on
historical performance data.


Applies some level-2 metrics to predict the performance
figures of the level-1 metrics.


Source: Proposed by Authors.


Fig. 2. Architecture of an adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system. Source: Based on Jang (1993).


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






membership functions such as triangular, trapezoidal, or gaussian
should be chosen for each input variable. In several applications in-
volving decision making, the membership functions are associated to
linguistic terms defined by specialists (Aengchuan & Phruksaphanrat,
2018; Güneri, Ertay, & Yücel, 2011; Jassbi et al., 2010).


In layer 1, the objective is to fuzzify the input values (x and y) of the
model, that is, to convert a set of crisp numerical values into one or
more equivalent fuzzy sets. The output of this layer consists of a set of
membership values corresponding to the level of activation of each one
of the membership functions of the input variables: { x xµ ( ), ,µ ( )}


A A


m1
and y y{µ ( ), , µ ( )B Bk1 }. In layer 2, each node corresponds to the
antecedent part of a inference rule, which represents possible combi-
nations between the membership functions of the first layer. The ob-
jective of layer 2 is to compose the logical relationships between the
activated membership functions in order to determine the weight of
each rule ( i). As shown in Fig. 3, inference rules of ANFIS are similar to
ones of a first-order Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference system. Fig. 3(a)
illustrates the first rule of an ANFIS, while Fig. 3(b) shows the last one.
A t-norm operator such as minimum or algebraic product is applied to
calculate the activation degree of each inference rule, as in Eqs. (1) and
(2), respectively. Layer 3 nodes are dedicated exclusively to the nor-
malization of weights of the activated rules by means of Eq. (3) (Jang,
1993; Güneri et al., 2011).
min{µ (x), µ (y)}


A B


(1)


µ (x)·µ (y)


A B


(2)


= + + + +¯ ii i1 n (3)
Layer 4 is composed of a set of adaptive nodes that represent the


consequents of the inference rules and provide the outputs of each rule.
Each consequent is represented by a linear function or a constant value.
In the first case, as indicated in Fig. 2, the crisp values of the input
variables (x and y) serve as parameters of the function. The output of
each node of the layer 4 is computed by multiplication between the
consequent and the weight of the activated rule. Finally, using the Eq.
(4), layer 5 performs the aggregation of the outputs of each layer 4 node
by means of a weighted sum, which provides the final output of the
system (Jang, 1993; Aengchuan & Phruksaphanrat, 2018).


= =f ¯ ·fi 1
n


i i
(4)


Fig. 4 illustrates the inference process of an ANFIS. In this example,
two fuzzy input variables are partitioned by triangular membership
functions. In the fuzzification step, the crisp value x activates the fuzzy
sets A1 and A2, whereas y activates B1 and B2, with different member-
ship degrees. The combination of the activated fuzzy sets triggers two
inference rules, which weights ( 1 and 2) are calculated by the
minimum or algebraic product operators based on the values of


x x xµ ( ), µ ( ), µ ( )
A B A1 1 2 and xµ ( )B2 . In the last step, following Eqs. (3) and
(4), the output values of the activated rules ( f1 and f2) are weighted
using 1 and 2 in order to produce the final output f (Jang, 1993;


Aengchuan & Phruksaphanrat, 2018).
Modelling of ANFIS is an empirical process that requires several


computational tests aiming to choose an appropriate network topology
for each model. A set of topological parameters that directly affects the
prediction accuracy of an ANFIS, such as the number of membership
functions of the input variables, the type of membership function, the
type of consequent, and the logical operator of the inference rules
should be evaluated in each test (Aengchuan & Phruksaphanrat, 2018;
Özkan & Inal, 2014). Several studies have adopted methods of cross-
validation to support the modelling of the ANFIS process in order to
develop topologies that attain superior prediction accuracy (Dewan,
Huggett, Liao, Wahab, & Okeil, 2016; Erdas, Andac, Gurkan-Alp,
Alpaslan, & Buyukbingol, 2013; Kolus, Imbeau, Dubé, & Dubeau, 2015).
Such methods evaluate distinct combinations of values of parameters
with the purpose of selecting those that achieve the minor error in the
validation stage of the model. Examples of cross-validation methods
comprise leave-one-out cross-validation (Dewan et al., 2016), k-fold
cross-validation (Kolus et al., 2015) and random subsampling cross-
validation (Erdas et al., 2013), which have been applied in this study.


Application of the random subsampling cross-validation method
involves several learning processes that require a set of sample values of
the input and output variables. Each learning process is composed of
two stages, named training and validation. The total set of samples
should be subdivided in two subsets. While the first subset is applied to
tune the adaptive parameters during the training stage, the second is
employed to evaluate the prediction accuracy of each candidate to-
pology. The percentage of samples recommended is 60 to 90% for the
training subset and 10 to 40% for validation subset (Özkan & Inal,
2014; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019). One of the learning methods
most frequently applied to ANFIS tuning is a hybrid algorithm proposed
by Jang (1993). In the first step of this algorithm, called forward, while
the initial values of the membership functions of the input variables are
kept fixed, the Least Mean Squares (LMS) method is applied to tune the
adaptive parameters of the layer 4 (represented in Figs. 3 and 4 by ai, bi
and ci). In the backward step, the algorithm backpropagation adjusts
the membership functions of the input variables based on the mini-
mization of the error between the output value yield by the ANFIS
model and the output value of each training sample. The number of
times the training subset is presented to the model, called number of
epochs, serves as a stopping criterion for the training process. After
completing training, in the validation stage, accuracy of the model is
assessed using measures such as the Mean Square Error (MSE) or Mean
Absolute Error (MAE). If none of the tested candidate topologies
reaches the required accuracy level, new topologies should be created
in order to test new values for the parameters of the model.


4. A system for supply chain performance evaluation


The system proposed by this study to aid supply chain performance
evaluation is based on Jang (1993), Ganga and Carpinetti (2011), SCC
(2012), and Lima-Junior and Carpinetti (2019). As depicted in Fig. 5, it
utilizes a set of seven neuro-fuzzy systems to model the causal relation-
ships defined by SCOR®, making it possible to estimate the values of
level-1 metrics based on level-2 metrics. The main objective of the model
is to support a predictive diagnosis that allows identifying which level-1
metric(s) underperform so as to develop action plans to fulfil the iden-
tified performance gaps. The inputs of the neuro-fuzzy models consist of
level-2 metrics, whereas the output variables represent level-1 metrics. In
the case of the ANFIS model 5, it uses the level-2 metrics “inventory ”,
“accounts receivable”, and “accounts payable” to predict the perfor-
mance values of variable y5. This variable is applied to calculate the
performance figures of level-1 metric “return on capital working capital”,
which is estimated by model 3 also considering “total cost to serves” and
“supply chain revenue”. It is worth to note that since the set of measures
adopted in this study is entirely based on the SCOR® metrics, the pro-
posed system does not calculate an overall performance score.


Fig. 3. The first (a) and last (b) inference rule of an ANFIS. Source: Based on
Güneri et al. (2011).


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti










To apply the proposed system to the performance evaluation of a
supply chain, the following steps should be taken:


i. Define set of SCOR®metrics: choose a set of SCOR® level-1 metrics
aligned with the competitive strategies and objectives defined to
manage the supply chain. The SCOR® model (SCC, 2012) suggests
choosing at least one metric related to each performance attribute in
order to promote a balanced assessment and a decision making process
based on different perspectives. Realistic performance targets should
also be established for each metric;


ii. Train ANFIS: gather or estimate a set of performance figures from
the chosen level-2 metrics. The values of level-1 metrics should also be
collected or estimated by decision makers according to the values


defined for level-2 metrics. The SCOR® model (SCC, 2012) highlights
that these data should be obtained based on estimation or historical
data extracted from traditional organizational systems. It is essential to
ensure that at least one sample containing the upper and lower limit
values of all input and output variables is included in the training
subset. These samples should be applied to carry out the supervised
learning processes of the ANFIS models using the random subsampling
cross-validation method. After completing the learning processes, when
the cause and effect relationships between input and output metrics is
defined by the ANFIS models, the system is able to predict the values of
the SCOR® level-1 metrics;


iii. Predict SC performance: to predict performance related to level-


Fig. 4. Inference process of an ANFIS. Source: Jang (1993).


Fig. 5. Proposed system for supply chain performance evaluation.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






1 metrics, at least one sample of the current performance in each of the
level-2 metrics needs to be presented to the ANFIS models. These
samples should be normalized using Eq. (5).


=x x x
x x


i


'


i min


max min


(5)
iv. Plan improvement actions: based on the comparison between the


predicted performance values and the targets defined for each level-1
metric, managers can identify the gaps of performance so as to elabo-
rate and implement action plans aiming to improve outcomes of the
supply chain operations. These action plans should be focused on the
enhancement of the supply chain processes related to the level 1 and 2
metrics whose performance is below of the expected level. Monitoring
of the effectiveness of these plans can also be done using the proposed
system.


Regarding the learning process mentioned in step 2, Fig. 6 suggests
a sequence of steps to apply the random subsampling cross-validation
method in order to select the candidate topologies that present the
superior accuracy. Initially, samples values of SCOR® level 1 and 2
metrics should be normalized according to Eq. (5). It is also divided into
two subsets of samples, with about 70% of the samples being applied in
the training stage and the remainder in the validation stage. After or-
ganizing the samples, a set of candidate topologies should be created by
varying the settings of the same parameters that directly affect the
accuracy of the ANFIS models, including the number of fuzzy partitions,


the type of membership functions, the type of consequent and fuzzy
operator used in the layer 2. Values for training parameters, such as
learning rate and number of epochs, should also be defined. The se-
lection of the values of these parameters should be made based on the
literature and empirical computational tests. With respect to the initial
values of parameters of the membership functions, it can be defined
based on knowledge from specialists or by symmetrically dividing the
universe of discourse of the input variables by the number of linguistic
terms adopted. The type of consequent and fuzzy operators to be tested
in the inference rule base should also be indicated as well as the values
for the prediction performance accuracy desired for each ANFIS model.


Training the ANFIS models should be carried out using the hybrid
algorithm proposed by Jang (1993), in which the least squares method
is used to adjust the parameters of the consequent part of the inference
rules, whereas the backpropagation algorithm is applied to adjust the
membership functions of the input variables. At each training epoch,
the values of the input variables of the training subset are computed by
the ANFIS models in order to estimate an output value for each sample.
Then, the estimated values are compared with the output values of the
training subset so as to calculate the values of MSE that are used to
tuning the adaptive parameters of the neuro-fuzzy models. When the
training stage is finished, the values of MSE are computed based on the
validation subset. If at least one candidate topology reaches a sa-
tisfactory prediction accuracy, the one that produces the lowest MSE in
the validation stage should be chosen. When none of the topologies


Fig. 6. Sequence of steps for application of the random subsampling cross-validation method.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






Table 3
Description of the metrics of the proposed performance evaluation system.
ANFIS model Brief description Universe of discourse Measurement unit


1 x1 - orders delivered in full: “evaluates if all items on the order line are received by customer in the
specified quantities.”


[0; 1]
(SCC, 2012)


Dimensionless


x2 - delivery performance to customer commit date: “an order is considered delivered to the
customer in the commitment date if: the order is received on time as defined by the customer; and
delivery is made to the correct location and customer entity.”


[0; 1]
(SCC, 2012)


Dimensionless


x3 - documentation accuracy: “an order is considered to have accurate documentation when the
following are accepted by the customer: shipping documentation, payment documentation,
compliance documentation, and other required documentations.”


[0; 1]
(SCC, 2012)


Dimensionless


x4 - perfect condition: “orders delivered in an undamaged state that meet specification, have the
correct configuration, are faultlessly installed (as applicable) and accepted by the customer.”


[0; 1]
(SCC, 2012)


Dimensionless


y1 - perfect order fulfilment: “quantifies the orders meeting delivery performance with complete
and accurate documentation and no delivery damage. For an order line to be considered as perfect,
all of the individual components must be perfect. Each component receives a score of 1 if it is judged
to be perfect.”


[0; 4]
(SCC, 2012)


Dimensionless


2 x5 - value at risk (plan): “is the sum of the monetized risks related to the plan process.” [10,000; 100,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x6 - value at risk (source): “is the sum of the monetized risks related to the source process.” [50,000; 200,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x7 - value at risk (make): “is the sum of the monetized risks associated to the make process.” [50,000; 300,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x8 - value at risk (deliver): “is the sum of the monetized risks related to the deliver process.” [20,000; 200,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x9 - value at risk (return): “is the sum of the monetized risks associated to the return process.” [20,000; 200,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


y2 - overall value at risk: “is the sum of the probability of risk events times the monetary impact of
the events which can impact any core supply chain functions (e.g. Plan, Source, Make, Deliver or
Return) or key dependences. The use of VaR allows organizations to look at all potential supply
chain risks through one metric and helps prioritize mitigation efforts.”


[150,000; 1,000,000]
(SCC, 2012)


$


3 x10 - source cycle time: “the sum of the time spent to identify sources of supply, select the supplier
(s), negotiate cycle time, schedule product delivery, receive, verify and transfer product, and
authorize supplier payment.”


[1; 6]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


x11 - make cycle time: “the sum of time spent to finalize production engineering, schedule
production activities, material unloading, produce, test, package and release product.”


[1; 7]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


x12 - delivery cycle time: “the average time associated with deliver processes.” [1; 7]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


x13 - delivery retail cycle time: “the average processes cycle time to acquire, merchandise, and sell
finished goods at a retail store.”


[7; 20]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


Days


y3 - order fulfilment cycle time: “the average actual cycle time achieved to fulfil customer orders.
For each individual order, this cycle starts from the receipt of the order and ends with the
acceptance of the order by the customer.”


[10; 40]
(SCC, 2012)


Days


4 x14 - sourcing cost: “is the total cost associated with managing and ordering, receiving, inspection
and warehousing of material, products, merchandise and services.”


[140,000; 300,000]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011;
Jalalvand et al., 2011)


$


x15 - planning cost: “is the total cost of personnel, automation, assets and overhead associated with
the supply chain planning processes.”


[25,000; 50,000]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011;
Jalalvand et al., 2011)


$


x16 - material landed cost: “the total cost associated with buying materials, products or
merchandize and making them available to the location of use.”


[70,000; 150,000]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011;
Jalalvand et al., 2011)


$


x17 - production cost: “the total cost associated with managing and performing production
processes.”


[150,000; 380,000]
(Jalalvand et al., 2011)


$


x18 - order management cost: “the total personnel, automation, assets and overhead cost
associated with the fulfilment of orders.”


[220,000; 480,000]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


$


x19 - fulfilment cost: “the total cost of personnel, automation and assets associated with the
responding to inquiries and quotes, order entry and maintenance, scheduling transportation, order
tracking and tracing, delivery, installation and invoicing.”


[45,000; 70,000]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011;
Jalalvand et al., 2011)


$


x20 - returns cost: “the total cost of disposition of materials returned due to planning errors,
supplier quality, product, order management and delivery errors.”


[50,000; 200,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x21- cost of goods sold: “the cost of direct materials, direct labour and overhead associated with the
acquisition or production of finished goods.”


[1,300,000; 1,900,000]
(Jalalvand et al., 2011; Ganga &
Carpinetti, 2011)


$


y4 - total cost to serve: “the sum of the direct and indirect costs to deliver products and services to
customers. Total cost to serve is the sum of planning cost, sourcing cost, material landed cost,
production cost, order management cost, fulfilment cost, and returns cost.”


[2,000,000; 3,530,000]
(SCC, 2012)


$


5 x22 - inventory: “the amount of inventory (stock) expressed in dollars.” [100,000; 2,000,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x23 - accounts receivable: “the amount of accounts receivable outstanding expressed in dollars.” [500,000; 2,000,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


x24 - accounts payable: “the amount of purchased materials, labour and/or conversion resources
that are to be paid.”


[500,000; 2,000,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


y5 – “it quantifies the denominator used in the calculations of “return on working capital.” [−1,400,000; 3,500,000]
(SCC, 2012)


$


(continued on next page)


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






accomplishes the desired accuracy level, one of the actions listed in
Fig. 6 should be taken following the sequence in which they are listed.
In this way, the learning process of all the candidate topologies should
be restarted.


5. Illustrative application case


An illustrative application case was developed with the objective of:
select the best topologies for each one of the seven ANFIS models that
compose the proposed performance evaluation system; assess the suit-
ability of these models to estimate the performance figures of the
SCOR® level-1 metrics. All of the SCOR® metrics shown in Fig. 5 have
been considered in this application case. Table 3 details these metrics
and their measurement units according to SCC (2012) and Lima-Junior
and Carpinetti (2019). It also indicates the universe of discourse defined
for each metric based on some studies from literature. Table 4 details
the parameters to be set during the implementation of the proposed
model, as well as the values tested in this study using the random
subsampling cross-validation method. In order to minimize the amount
of inference rules of each ANFIS model, the number of membership
functions of the input variables was initially defined as two based on
Özkan and Inal (2014). Following Akkoç (2012) and Aengchuan and
Phruksaphanrat (2018), triangular and Gaussian membership functions
were evaluated since they are more sensitive to variations in the values
of the performance metrics. A symmetric partitioning of the input
variables was made in order to define the initial values of the


membership functions. Based on Jang (1993) and Güneri et al. (2011),
the minimum and algebraic product operators were tested to perform
the logical operations “AND” in the inference rules. Regarding the types
of consequent, linear functions and constant crisp values was evaluated.
As proposed by Jang (1993), the weighted average operator was
adopted to aggregate the results provide by the rules in all of the ANFIS
models implemented. Table 5 presents the set of candidate topologies
tested for each ANFIS model. As can be seen, eight candidate topologies
were implemented and assessed for each model.


The data used in the training and validation stages of the models
was generated by means of the following steps (Lima-Junior &
Carpinetti, 2019): (i) Using MS Excel, the performance values of the
level-2 metrics were randomly generated considering the intervals of
the universe of discourse shown in Table 3; (ii) Based on the expressions
suggested by the SCOR® (SCC, 2012), the values of level-1 metrics were
obtained using the generated values in the previous step; (iii) The total
set of data was subdivided, with 70% of the samples applied in the
training stage and 30% used in the validation of the models. In each
training subset, some samples of the lower limit values of the universe
of discourse of each input variable were included. Samples of the upper
limit values of these variables were also inserted; (4) All the sample
values were normalized using Eq. (5). The length of the subsets of
training and validation for each model was defined based on empirical
tests and studies from literature such as Fan et al. (2013) and Lima-
Junior and Carpinetti (2019). Table 6 present the amount of samples
generated to train and validate each of the ANFIS models, as well as


Table 3 (continued)


ANFIS model Brief description Universe of discourse Measurement unit


6 x25 - total cost to serve: “it is the output variable (y) of the ANFIS model 4.” [2,000,000; 3,530,000]
(SCC, 2012)


$


x26 - “it is the output variable (y) of the ANFIS model 5.” [−1,400,000; 3,500,000]
(SCC, 2012)


$


x27 - supply chain revenue: “refers to the operating revenue generated from a supply chain. This
does not include non-operating revenue, such investments and sale of office buildings.”


[3,500,000; 10,000,000]
(Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019)


$


y6 - return on working capital: “refers to the magnitude of investment relative to a company's
working capital position versus the revenue generated from a supply chain.”


[−15; 100]
(SCC, 2012)


%


7 x28 - days sales outstanding: “the length of time from when a sale is made until cash for it is
received from customers.”


[25; 70]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


x29 - inventory days of supply: “the amount of inventory (stock) expressed in days of sales.” [27; 80]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


x30 - days payable outstanding: “the length of time from purchasing materials, labour and/or
conversion resources until cash payments must be made.”


[30; 72]
(Ganga & Carpinetti, 2011)


Days


y7 - cash-to-cash cycle time: “the time it takes for an investment made to flow back into a company
after it has been spent for raw materials.”


[22; 120]
(SCC, 2012)


Days


Source: SCC (2012).


Table 4
Summary of the topological and training parameters of the ANFIS models.
Parameters Relevance Tested values


Number of fuzzy membership functions of
the input variables


Defines the partition granularity of the fuzzy variables. 2 (Özkan & Inal, 2014)


Type and initial values of the membership
functions


Determine the behavior of input variables. The membership functions are used in the
steps of fuzzification and inference.


Gaussian (Akkoç, 2012)
Triangular (Aengchuan & Phruksaphanrat,
2018)


Type of consequent of the inference rules Produces an output value for each activated inference rule. Linear function (Jang, 1993)
Constant value (Jang, 1993)


Fuzzy operator used in layer 2 Aggregate the degrees of membership functions activated in the fuzzification step. Minimum (Jang, 1993)
Algebraic product (Güneri et al., 2011)


Aggregation operator used in layer 5 Aggregate the individual contributions from the activated inference rules into a single
crisp value.


Weighted average (Jang, 1993)


Desired accuracy of prediction for each
model


Refers to the maximum MSE value tolerable by managers in the stage of use of the
system. It also serves as acceptance criterion of candidate topologies in the validation
stage.


1× 10−3 (Fan et al., 2013; Lima-Junior &
Carpinetti, 2019)


Learning rate Determines the magnitude of the gradient used to adjust the membership functions. It
also influences how fast the ANFIS model will reach the point of minimization of MSE
in the training stage.


0.01 (MathWorks, 2019)


Number of epochs Defines how many times the training subset should be presented to the ANFIS model. 200 (MathWorks, 2019)


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






instances of samples and their normalized values. All candidate topol-
ogies were trained using the learning method originally proposed by
Jang (1993). As indicated in Table 4, the value adopted for the learning
rate was 0.01 in all the performed trainings, and the maximum number
of training epochs was set to 200. The results of the learning process of
the candidate topologies are detailed next.


5.1. Results of training and validation of the ANFIS models


The learning processes of the evaluated topologies were carried out
using MATLAB© software on a desktop computer with Intel Quad Core
i5 processor and 6 Gigabytes of RAM. Table 7 presents the MSE values
obtained in the training and validation stages for each of the candidate
topologies. For models 1, 2, 3, and 4, these values were obtained using
only two membership functions. For models 5, 6, and 7, following the
actions recommended in Fig. 6, the number of membership functions
used in each input variable was gradually increased in order to achieve
a satisfactory level of accuracy. Thus, the results shown in Table 7 for
these models were achieved using 5, 4, and 3 membership functions,
respectively. As can be seen in Table 7, several of the tested topologies
have achieved a value of MSE lower that the maximum value defined
based on the literature. The topologies highlighted in bold were chosen
since they have accomplished the best prediction accuracy. Among the
selected topologies, those that estimate the figures of the performance
metric perfect order fulfilment (ANFIS model 1) have reached the best
prediction accuracy, with MSE in validation stage equals to
1.9203 × 10−16. On the other hand, the topology that predicts the
performance metric “return on working capital” (ANFIS model 6) has
obtained the largest MSE value, equivalent to 3.6508 × 10−7. The
topologies with the second best level of accuracy for each ANFIS model
are also highlighted in bold in Table 7. They may be adopted alter-
natively as they have reached an accuracy level close to the best
topologies.


Some linear regression tests were executed in order to analyse the
relationship between the target values and the performance figures
predicted by the selected topologies. The coefficient of determination
(R2) was computed in order to estimate the proportion of the total
variability of the dependent variable y (predicted performance figures)
that can be explained by the independent variable x (output values of
the validation subset). The value of R2 correspond to the square of the
correlation coefficient. It is given as a percentage varying from 0 to 1
(Montgomery & Runger, 2011). Fig. 7 present the values for R2 and the
outcomes of regression tests using MS Excel. The target values for each
sample are represented in the horizontal axis, whereas the performance
figures predicted are in the vertical axis. The expression that indicates
the relationship pattern between these data for each ANFIS model is
also shown in Fig. 7. In these equations, the linear coefficient indicates
the point at which the line crosses the vertical axis, while the angular
coefficient represent how much the average of the estimated values by
the ANFIS models changes by an increase of one unit of the target va-
lues. The results presented in Fig. 7 point out that the performance
figures predicted by the ANFIS models are very near to the target


Table 5
Candidate topologies assessed for each of the ANFIS models.
ANFIS
model


Candidate
topology


Type of membership
function


T-norm
operator


Type of
consequent


1 Topology 1 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 2 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 3 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 4 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 5 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 6 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 7 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 8 Gaussian Product Crisp value


2 Topology 9 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 10 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 11 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 12 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 13 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 14 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 15 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 16 Gaussian Product Crisp value


3 Topology 17 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 18 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 19 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 20 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 21 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 22 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 23 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 24 Gaussian Product Crisp value


4 Topology 25 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 26 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 27 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 28 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 29 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 30 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 31 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 32 Gaussian Product Crisp value


5 Topology 33 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 34 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 35 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 36 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 37 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 38 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 39 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 40 Gaussian Product Crisp value


6 Topology 41 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 42 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 43 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 44 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 45 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 46 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 47 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 48 Gaussian Product Crisp value


7 Topology 49 Triangular Minimum Linear function
Topology 50 Triangular Minimum Crisp value
Topology 51 Triangular Product Linear function
Topology 52 Triangular Product Crisp value
Topology 53 Gaussian Minimum Linear function
Topology 54 Gaussian Minimum Crisp value
Topology 55 Gaussian Product Linear function
Topology 56 Gaussian Product Crisp value


Table 6
Amount of samples generated to train and validate the proposed ANFIS models.
ANFIS
model


Training
subset


Validation
subset


Instance of sample values Normalized data


1 210 90 x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 1, x4 = 0, y1 = 3. x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 1, x4 = 0, y1 = 0.75.
2 350 150 x5 = 21500, x6 = 83749, x7 = 68365, x8 = 41208, x9 = 20825,


y2 = 235647.
x5 = 0.1278, x6 = 0.2250, x7 = 0.0735, x8 = 0.1178, x9 = 0.0046,
y2 = 0.1008.


3 350 150 x10 = 3, x11 = 7, x12 = 2, x13 = 12, y3 = 24. x10 = 0.4, x11 = 1, x12 = 0.1667, x13 = 0.3846, y3 = 0.4667.
4 700 300 x14 = 163952, x15 = 33586, x16 = 95529, x17 = 180538,


x18 = 305101, x19 = 69307, x20 = 130847, x21 = 1413240,
y4 = 2392100.


x14 = 0.1497, x15 = 0.3434, x16 = 0.3191, x17 = 0.1328,
x18 = 0.3273, x19 = 0.9722, x20 = 0.5390, x21 = 0.1887,
y4 = 0.2563.


5 350 150 x22 = 309284, x23 = 1157403, x24 = 869462, y5 = 21343. x22 = 0.1101, x23 = 0.4383, x24 = 0.2463, y5 = 0.2901.
6 350 150 x25 = 2392100, x26 = 21343, x27 = 3716903, y6 = 62.072 x25 = 0.2562, x26 = 0.2901, x27 = 0.0334, y6 = 0.6702.
7 350 150 x28 = 30, x29 = 41, x30 = 38, y7 = 33. x28 = 0.1111, x29 = 0.2642, x30 = 0.1905, y7 = 0.1122.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






values, since the values of the linear coefficient are close to zero and
most of the angular coefficients are equals to 1. Additionally, in the
majority of the tests, the value for R2 is equal to 1. The only exception is
the ANFIS model 6, whose value of R2 correspond to 0.9954.


With the purpose of illustrating the inference process using the
ANFIS models, Fig. 8 presents the decision rule base of model 2 after the
learning process. This model is used to estimate the performance figures
of the overall value at risk (y2) based on the risks of planning (x5),
sourcing (x6), make (x7), delivery (x8), and return (x9). The antecedent
part of the decision rules are in the first up to the fifth columns, which
are composed by the input variables with their respective triangular


membership functions. The consequent part is depicted in the sixth
column. In this example, the values x5 = 1, x6 = 0.5, x7 = 0.5,
x8= 0.5, and x9= 1 are fuzzified so as to activate the rules 18, 20, 22,
24, 26, 28, 30, and 32. The aggregation of the values yielded by these
rules using the weighted average operator resulted in the value 0.7 for
the metric y2. The surface plots presented in Fig. 9 illustrate how the
variation of some input variables affect the output values of the ANFIS
models 2 and 5 (indicated as (a) and (b) in Fig. 9). The plot shown in
Fig. 9(a) indicates a linear relationship between the two input variables
and the output metric overall value at risk, whereas the surface re-
sponse represented in Figure (b) depicts a nonlinear relationship be-
tween the variable x25 and the output metric return on working capital.


Table 8 summarizes the results of the computational implementa-
tion and details some of the characteristics of the selected topologies.
The values obtained for MSE in the validation stage for all the ANFIS
models are much lower than the limit value defined based on the lit-
erature (1.0 × 10−3), which evidences that the proposed models pre-
sent a greater accuracy of prediction. Although 200 training epochs
have been performed throughout the training of each of the candidate
topologies, the process of minimizing the MSE was finished between 3
and 20 epochs in all the cases. The computational time consumed in the
training stage of each model was low. The training of model 4 was the
most time consuming, which can be explained by the fact the this model
comprises a greater amount of input variables and decision rules.


The use of triangular membership functions in the input variables
and constant values in the consequents yielded the best results in the
most of the implemented models. In the case of the topologies chosen
for the ANFIS models 1 and 6, the use of Gaussian membership func-
tions and linear consequent seems to be more suitable. Regarding the t-
norm operator applied to modelling the logical connectives of the in-
ference rules, the algebraic product operator provided better results
than the minimum operator in all the chosen topologies. Among the
actions suggested in Fig. 6 to increase the accuracy of ANFIS models, it
was only needed an increase in the number of membership functions of
the input variables of models 5, 6, and 7 in order to attain a satisfactory
accuracy. Thus, for most of the models, the use of only two membership
functions produced more accurate results.


When compared with the studies that applied artificial intelligence
techniques to evaluate suppliers or supply chains based on a particular
set of metrics, the MSE values reached by the chosen topologies are
lower than the ones achieved by Didehkhani et al. (2009), Jassbi et al.
(2010), Güneri et al. (2011), Efendigil and Önüt (2012), Fan et al.
(2013), Özkan and Inal (2014), and Tavana, Fallahpour, Caprio, and
Santos-Arteaga (2016). The MSE values obtained by these topologies
have been also smaller than the ones accomplished by Lima-Junior and
Carpinetti (2019) when using multilayer perceptron neural networks to
predict the performance figures of the SCOR® level-1 metrics. Thus, the
proposed ANFIS models reached a level of accuracy better than the
previous similar studies found in the literature.


6. Validation of the results using paired t-test


In order to check whether there is a significant difference between
the performance values estimated by the ANFIS models (Yi') and the
target values for each SCOR® level-1 metric (Yi), seven hypotheses tests
were executed using paired t test. According Montgomery and Runger
(2011), this type of test is suitable when the data of the populations are
gathered in pairs. Let (Y1, Y1'), (Y2, Y2' ), …, (Yn, Yn' ) be a set of n paired
samples, where µ1 represents the mean of the population represented by
Y and µ2 symbolize the mean of the population Y '. The differences
among each pair of observations are represented by =D Y Yi i i' (i= 1,
2, …, n). Assuming that the values of Di are normally distributed with
average µD = µ1 - µ2 and standard deviation SD, the objective of the
paired t-test is to verify whether µD equals to a given value 0. Thus, if
there is no significant difference between the two sets of samples, the
values of µD must be zero (µD = 0= 0). Table 9 describe the test as


Table 7
MSE values obtained for each candidate topology in the stages of training and
validation.
ANFIS model Candidate topology Training MSE Validation MSE


1 Topology 1 1.6475 × 10−16 2.0165 × 10−16
Topology 2 1.5647 × 10−15 1.8201 × 10−15
Topology 3 1.6176 × 10−16 1.9404 × 10−16**
Topology 4 1.3906 × 10−15 1.5924 × 10−15
Topology 5 2.5653 × 10−16 3.4220 × 10−16
Topology 6 3.0418 × 10−15 4.0348 × 10−15
Topology 7 1.6622 × 10−16 1.9203 × 10−16*
Topology 8 1.4229 × 10−15 1.6182 × 10−15


2 Topology 9 2.7756 × 10−10 4.1946 × 10−9
Topology 10 1.7065 × 10−3 2.4517 × 10−3
Topology 11 4.6719 × 10−10 1.5515 × 10−9**
Topology 12 4.8820 × 10−10 9.4665 × 10−10*
Topology 13 2.5697 × 10−10 5.2399 × 10−9
Topology 14 8.3463 × 10−4 1.1446 × 10−3
Topology 15 2.8656 × 10−10 1.2049 × 10−8
Topology 16 1.4544 × 10−6 1.9502 × 10−6


3 Topology 17 1.2229 × 10−10 2.0424 × 10−10
Topology 18 1.6617 × 10−3 2.3317 × 10−3
Topology 19 1.3498 × 10−10 1.9474 × 10−10**
Topology 20 1.5501 × 10−10 1.6800 × 10−10*
Topology 21 1.2099 × 10−10 2.0461 × 10−10
Topology 22 4.3418 × 10−4 4.8223 × 10−4
Topology 23 1.1525 × 10−10 2.0589 × 10−10
Topology 24 2.0359 × 10−6 2.6265 × 10−6


4 Topology 25 2.6105 × 10−10 1.0611 × 10−6**
Topology 26 1.3923 × 10−1 4.5675 × 10−1
Topology 27 3.3481 × 10−11 2.2704 × 10−5
Topology 28 6.9080 × 10−12 4.4936 × 10−11*
Topology 29 1.9717 × 10−9 2.6455 × 10−3
Topology 30 6.3605 × 10−2 8.2100 × 10−1
Topology 31 4.7528 × 10−10 1.1400 × 10−3
Topology 32 1.9573 × 10−5 4.5882 × 10−4


5 Topology 33 4.0340 × 10−11 4.0340 × 10−11
Topology 34 5.6632 × 10−3 5.6632 × 10−3
Topology 35 2.0062 × 10−12 2.0062 × 10−12**
Topology 36 5.8447 × 10−15 5.8447 × 10−15*
Topology 37 3.5283 × 10−10 3.5283 × 10−10
Topology 38 2.4738 × 10−3 2.4738 × 10−3
Topology 39 2.3991 × 10−10 2.3991 × 10−10
Topology 40 4.7138 × 10−6 4.7138 × 10−6


6 Topology 41 1.1141 × 10−4 1.2540 × 10−4
Topology 42 1.1302 × 10−3 1.5504 × 10−3
Topology 43 9.0421 × 10−5 9.4790 × 10−5**
Topology 44 9.1039 × 10−4 1.2121 × 10−3
Topology 45 1.5568 × 10−4 1.8536 × 10−4
Topology 46 3.4380 × 10−3 3.9489 × 10−3
Topology 47 1.4888 × 10−7 3.6508 × 10−7*
Topology 48 1.4342 × 10−4 1.2485 × 10−4


7 Topology 49 6.8779 × 10−12 2.1364 × 10−11
Topology 50 5.0631 × 10−4 7.2481 × 10−4
Topology 51 2.7664 × 10−13 4.8616 × 10−13**
Topology 52 1.0227 × 10−13 1.1935 × 10−13*
Topology 53 1.5607 × 10−11 4.4410 × 10−11
Topology 54 2.2740 × 10−4 2.5449 × 10−4
Topology 55 1.1842 × 10−11 3.5011 × 10−11
Topology 56 9.7333 × 10−7 1.5973 × 10−5


*Topologies with the best prediction accuracy.
**Topologies with the second best prediction accuracy.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






well the rejection criterion of the null hypothesis for a test with sig-
nificance level .


In order to carry out the hypothesis tests, a set of 30 samples of the
target values (Y) and the performance figures estimated using the


chosen topologies (Y') was adopted. The target values was obtained
following the procedure described in section 5 for data generation,
while the estimated values were calculated in the validation stage of the
learning process of the ANFIS models. Table 10 presents the target


Fig. 7. Results of the linear regression tests and values of R2 calculated for the ANFIS models 1(a), 2(b), 3(c), 4(d), 5(e), 6(f), and 7(g).


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






values and the estimated values for the metrics “perfect order fulfil-
ment”, “overall value at risk”, and “order fulfilment cycle time”. The
samples of “total cost to serve”, “return on working capital”, and “cash-
to-cash cycle time” are presented in Table 11, which also shows the
output values of the ANFIS model 5 that are applied to estimate the
performance figures of “return on work capital”.


Table 12 presents the results of the hypothesis tests considering a
level of significance = 0.05. It shows the values for the mean and the
standard deviation of the distribution of the differences between the


pairs of observations showed in Tables 10 and 11, as well as t n/2, 1, T0
and p-value. In all the tests, the calculated value for p-value is greater
than the level of significance adopted. In addition, all values obtained
for T0 are outside the rejection region of the null hypothesis. Therefore,
since the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, it is concluded that there is
no significant difference between the target values and the estimated
performance figures, which reinforce the accuracy of prediction of the
proposed ANFIS models by this study.


Fig. 8. Inference rules of the ANFIS model 2 after the learning process.


Fig. 9. Surface plots of some variables of the ANFIS models 2 (a) and 5 (b).


Table 8
Results of the implementation of the ANFIS models using the random subsampling cross-validation method.
ANFIS
model


Chosen
topology


Computational time of
training process


Type of
membership
function


Type of
consequent


T-norm
operator


Number of
partitions of the
input variables


Number of
inference rules


Validation MSE


1 Topology 7 13 sec Gaussian Linear function Product 2 16 1.9203 × 10−16
2 Topology 12 14 sec Triangular Crisp value Product 2 32 9.4665 × 10−10
3 Topology 20 7 sec Triangular Crisp value Product 2 16 1.6800 × 10−10
4 Topology 28 549 sec Triangular Crisp value Product 2 256 4.4936 × 10−11
5 Topology 36 84 sec Triangular Crisp value Product 5 125 5.8447 × 10−15
6 Topology 47 9 sec Gaussian Linear function Product 4 64 3.6508 × 10−7
7 Topology 52 9 sec Triangular Crisp value Product 3 27 1.1935 × 10−13


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






7. Conclusion


This study proposed a new intelligent system for supply chain per-
formance evaluation based on the combination between the SCOR®
level 1 and 2 metrics with ANFIS neuro-fuzzy models. In total, 56
topologies were assessed using the random subsampling cross-valida-
tion method in order to choose the most appropriate one for each ANFIS
model. For all the studied topologies, the algebraic product operator
generated better outcomes than the minimum operator. In most of the
cases, the utilization of triangular membership functions for the input
variables and constant values in the consequent part of the inference
rules resulted in a greater accuracy of prediction. In addition, in four of
the seven proposed ANFIS models, it was more adequate to adopt fewer
membership functions. It contributed to minimize the number of in-
ference rules, decrease the amount of adaptive parameters and conse-
quently made the learning process faster.


Several tests were carried out to assess the accuracy of the proposed
models. The MSE values obtained by each topology throughout the
learning process (Tables 7 and 8) indicate that the ANFIS model 1
reached the higher accuracy of prediction (1.9203× 10−16), while the
model 6 achieved the lowest one (3.6508 × 10−7). The lowest accu-
racy of model 6 may be due to the fact that it models a nonlinear


relationship between the input and output metrics, which is more
complicated than the linear relationships quantified by the other
models. The results of the hypothesis tests using paired samples indicate
that there is no significant difference between the target values and the
performance values estimated by each chosen topology, which
strengthens the suitability of usage of ANFIS neuro-fuzzy systems for
the evaluation of supply chain performance.


The proposed system enables operations managers to quantify the
supply chain performance under different perspectives, providing in-
formation that allows analyzing the gap between the expected and
achieved performance level in each SCOR® level-1 metric. In this way,
managers can elaborate action plans aiming at enhancing the outcomes
of the metrics that present underperformance. Use of the proposed
system allows managers to evaluate the effectiveness of their strategies,
thus contributing to the focus company being more proactive in the
search for better performance results. Over time, managers can switch
the metrics used in the proposed evaluation system. However, as with
other intelligent systems based on fuzzy inference and artificial neural
networks, changes of metrics require that the ANFIS models be re-
constructed and trained using samples of new variables. In comparison
to the supply chain performance evaluation models found in the lit-
erature, the system proposed by this study has the following ad-
vantages:


• Differently of the models proposed by Didehkhani et al. (2009),
Jassbi et al. (2010), and Fan et al. (2013), the proposed system uses
a broad set of metrics related to different performance attributes,
including reliability, agility, responsiveness, cost, and asset man-
agement. The use of the metrics suggested by Supply Chain Council
(SSC, 2012) contributes to a better alignment, standardization, and
integration of performance measures across different tiers of a
supply chain. Another advantage is the compatibility of the SCOR®
metrics with the SCORmark database, which enables benchmarking
based on the comparison between the estimated performance figures
and performance database from several supply chains around the
world;
• In contrast with the supply chain performance evaluation models
that combine SCOR® metrics with mathematical programming ap-
proaches (Liu & Liu, 2017; Zhang & Reimann, 2014) or multicriteria
decision methods (Akkawuttiwanich & Yenradee, 2018; Bukhori
et al., 2015; Clivillé & Berrah, 2012; Dissanayake & Cross, 2018;
Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009; Jalalvand et al., 2011; Kocaoglu
et al., 2013; Moharamkhani et al., 2017; Sellitto et al., 2015;
Theeranuphattana & Tang, 2008; Yang & Jiang, 2012), the appli-
cation of ANFIS models allows modelling non-linear causal re-
lationships between input and output metrics, as well as enables
adaptation to environment of use based on historical data;
• Unlike the model based on Mamdani fuzzy inference developed by
Ganga and Carpinetti (2011), with manual adjustment of the para-
meters based on the judgments of specialists, the proposed system is
able to automatically tune the fuzzy input variables and the in-
ference rules based on a supervised learning procedure. When
compared to models based on artificial neural networks (Fan et al.,
2013; Wang, 2013; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019), ANFIS models
require fewer training times to adjust their adaptive parameters. In
addition, it requires a smaller number of training because it does not
contain random parameters such as neural networks. Therefore, in
addition to better prediction accuracy, the use of ANFIS makes the
learning process faster and contributes to a greater agility of the
modelling process;
• One benefit over the models based on artificial neural networks (Fan
et al., 2013; Wang, 2013; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019) and other
techniques based on crisp numbers (Golparvar & Seifbarghy, 2009;
Liu & Liu, 2017; Zhang & Reimann, 2014) refers to the ability to
modelling imprecise values and uncertain variables by means of the
fuzzy representation of the input variables. The ANFIS models seeks


Table 9
Statistical test and rejection criterion of the null hypothesis.
Null hypothesis: H0: µD = 0


Test statistic: T0 = D̄SD / n
Alternative hypothesis: H1: µD ≠ 0
Rejection region (for two-tailed test): t0 > t /2,n 1 or t0 < -t /2,n 1
Reject H0 if the p-value is <


Source: Montgomery and Runger (2011).


Table 10
Values used in the hypothesis tests (ANFIS models 1–4).
Perfect order fulfilment
(ANFIS model 1)


Overall value at risk
(ANFIS model 2)


Order fulfilment cycle
time (ANFIS model 3)


Y1 Y1′ Y2 Y2′ Y3 Y3′


0.75000 0.75000 0.02910 0.02913 0.35975 0.35975
0.75000 0.75000 0.16070 0.16068 0.66578 0.66580
0.75000 0.75000 0.37320 0.37313 0.37256 0.37258
0.75000 0.75000 0.55200 0.55201 0.34703 0.34703
0.50000 0.50000 0.68430 0.68433 0.23563 0.23565
0.50000 0.50000 0.47450 0.47450 0.50199 0.50195
0.50000 0.50000 0.48640 0.48632 0.49515 0.49515
0.25000 0.25000 0.40940 0.40942 0.57437 0.57435
0.25000 0.25000 0.47240 0.47242 0.60917 0.60915
0.00000 0.00000 0.40580 0.40573 0.47743 0.47743
1.00000 1.00000 0.60280 0.60274 0.68433 0.68433
0.75000 0.75000 0.59090 0.59083 0.44109 0.44108
0.75000 0.75000 0.37090 0.37088 0.52120 0.52120
0.75000 0.75000 0.47980 0.47982 0.56321 0.56320
0.75000 0.75000 0.52750 0.52755 0.57010 0.57010
0.50000 0.50000 0.42460 0.42455 0.66933 0.66933
0.50000 0.50000 0.63780 0.63784 0.46043 0.46045
0.50000 0.50000 0.56670 0.56672 0.64970 0.64970
0.25000 0.25000 0.34980 0.34978 0.70267 0.70268
0.25000 0.25000 0.57030 0.57032 0.56194 0.56195
0.00000 0.00000 0.50880 0.50879 0.71196 0.71195
1.00000 1.00000 0.45580 0.45579 0.67680 0.67678
0.75000 0.75000 0.53660 0.53650 0.35284 0.35288
0.75000 0.75000 0.59260 0.59261 0.71811 0.71812
0.75000 0.75000 0.47040 0.47041 0.33342 0.33340
0.75000 0.75000 0.56740 0.56745 0.35337 0.35338
0.50000 0.50000 0.77130 0.77132 0.49136 0.49138
0.50000 0.50000 0.70790 0.70788 0.14617 0.14617
0.50000 0.50000 0.50230 0.50238 0.58883 0.58880
0.25000 0.25000 0.40400 0.40405 0.60729 0.60728


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






to imitate human reasoning by establishing cause and effect re-
lationships between variables as well as considering uncertain sce-
narios. In this way, the output value of the system is calculated
considering the combination of all the scenarios represented by the
triggered rules with their respective degrees of activation;
• Another benefit is that the procedure for calculating the perfor-
mance values of the output variables using ANFIS models is more
transparent and easy to understand than those used in the artificial
neural networks, since it allows to identify which decision rules
justify the yielded results. Therefore, the greater interpretability of
information provided by the decision rules can bring more con-
fidence to operations managers when dealing with decision making
processes aiming at improving the supply chain performance.


Another contribution of this study is to suggest the most appropriate
topological parameters when using the SCOR® level 1 and 2 metrics, as
well as to provide some guidelines for the creation of ANFIS models and
for conducting the learning process using the random subsampling
cross-validation method. Thus, the steps suggested in Fig. 6 can be
adopted by other studies that aim to develop new intelligent decision


support systems based on ANFIS models, which is even more relevant in
face of the trend towards intelligent systems in the context of industry
4.0.


Regarding limitations of the proposed performance evaluation
system, the main one is the difficulty of collecting enough data to carry
out the learning process of the ANFIS models. Due to this difficulty, it
has not yet been possible to apply the proposed system in a real case.
The difficulty of collecting data to assess the supply chain performance
has been pointed out in several studies (Didehkhani et al., 2009;
Brandenburg, Govindan, Sarkis, & Seuring, 2014; Dias & Ierapetritou,
2017; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2017). Dias and Ierapetritou (2017)
points out that currently most companies use a variety of different IT
tools in order to manage their supply chains. However, such tools are
often not integrated with each other. Thus, data from the different le-
vels of decision making are generally collected and kept in different
functional areas within the company. As a result, the different decision
makers involved in the supply chain management do not have access to
all the data they require to make optimal decisions (Dias & Ierapetritou,
2017). However, factors such as greater integration of processes and
performance measurement systems across the supply chain tiers, as well
as the popularization of data management technologies such as Big
Data and Data Warehouse, can contribute to increase data availability
and to facilitate implementation of the proposed system in the coming
years (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018; Lima-Junior & Carpinetti, 2019).


Another limitation of the proposed system is related to the amount
of input variables and fuzzy partitions that can be adopted for each
ANFIS model. If many partitions are adopted, there will be a large
number of possible combinations between them, and consequently the
number of inference rules will also be high. In this case, a larger amount
of training samples to tune the topological parameters may be needed.
In addition, it may affect the accuracy of the results provided by the
system.


Further studies can implement the proposed system in real cases


Table 11
Values used in the hypothesis tests (ANFIS models 4–7).
Total cost to serve (ANFIS model 4) Input used to predict return on work capital


(ANFIS model 5)
Return on work capital (ANFIS model
6)


Cash-to-cash cycle time (ANFIS model
7)


Y4 Y4′ Y5 Y5′ Y6 Y6′ Y7 Y7′


0.31500 0.31500 0.27267 0.27267 0.24000 0.23967 0.53333 0.53333
0.30625 0.30625 0.43200 0.43200 0.58330 0.60263 0.28889 0.28889
0.45375 0.45375 0.39800 0.39800 0.00000 0.00071 0.31852 0.31852
0.88125 0.88125 0.28000 0.28000 0.60000 0.59000 0.58519 0.58519
0.46000 0.46000 0.57233 0.57233 0.40000 0.40771 0.51852 0.51852
0.10250 0.10250 0.43100 0.43100 0.35000 0.34646 0.89630 0.89630
0.34750 0.34750 0.54533 0.54533 0.28000 0.27592 0.29630 0.29630
0.56250 0.56250 0.47733 0.47733 0.22860 0.23714 0.42963 0.42963
0.54625 0.54625 0.46933 0.46933 0.76920 0.77037 0.22222 0.22222
0.59250 0.59250 0.43300 0.43300 0.85710 0.85538 0.22222 0.22222
0.39000 0.39000 0.14800 0.14800 0.68180 0.69397 0.13333 0.13333
0.51250 0.51250 0.25400 0.25400 0.73330 0.75158 0.55556 0.55556
0.12125 0.12125 0.66267 0.66267 0.46000 0.45064 0.60000 0.60000
0.11000 0.11000 0.80767 0.80767 0.53330 0.55339 0.40741 0.40741
0.30000 0.30000 0.61933 0.61933 0.13500 0.12164 0.51852 0.51852
0.77500 0.77500 0.11000 0.11000 0.36000 0.34320 0.42963 0.42963
0.35125 0.35125 0.28667 0.28667 0.24570 0.26560 0.37778 0.37778
0.53875 0.53875 0.22467 0.22467 0.10000 0.10736 0.70370 0.70370
0.18500 0.18500 0.53533 0.53533 0.20000 0.19383 0.42222 0.42222
0.53625 0.53625 0.42400 0.42400 0.03330 0.13525 0.22222 0.22222
0.41375 0.41375 0.46033 0.46033 0.81820 0.82549 0.53333 0.53333
0.30875 0.30875 0.69700 0.69700 0.08330 0.08666 0.45185 0.45185
0.62625 0.62625 0.51800 0.51800 0.90000 0.88589 0.45185 0.45185
0.49125 0.49125 0.19433 0.19433 0.60000 0.61313 0.57037 0.57037
0.50500 0.50500 0.20400 0.20400 0.50000 0.48720 0.57778 0.57778
0.24625 0.24625 0.47633 0.47633 0.40000 0.38908 0.25185 0.25185
0.26000 0.26000 0.37367 0.37367 0.00000 −0.00021 0.41482 0.41481
0.41000 0.41000 0.15167 0.15167 1.00000 0.98221 0.40741 0.40741
0.09625 0.09625 0.35933 0.35933 0.27270 0.27526 0.59259 0.59259
0.17125 0.17125 0.72333 0.72333 0.19170 0.19395 0.37037 0.37037


Table 12
Results of the hypothesis tests using paired t-test.
ANFIS
model


D̄ SD t n/2, 1 T0 p-value


1 1.371 × 10−8 2.027 × 10−17 2.04523 −1.41930 0.16647
2 3.507 × 10−5 6.769 × 10−10 2.04523 0.51918 0.60758
3 1.173 × 10−5 1.046 × 10−10 2.04523 0.52546 0.60326
4 6.730 × 10−7 3.816 × 10−13 2.04523 −0.17958 0.85870
5 6.712 × 10−9 2.871 × 10−17 2.04523 −0.43393 0.66755
6 1.220 × 10−2 3.280 × 10−4 2.04523 −1.05507 0.30010
7 3.020 × 10−7 2.740 × 10−14 2.04523 0.19818 0.84429


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti






aiming to evaluate its usability by users who are not specialists in
neuro-fuzzy systems, as well assess its applicability to benchmarking
using SCORmark. In these applications, different learning algorithms
can be tested. Other suggestions for further studies are: the develop-
ment of ANFIS models to estimate the values of the SCOR® level-2
metrics based on the performance figures of the SCOR® level-3 metrics;
the application of other computational intelligence techniques to deal
with supply chain performance evaluation, including the recent
methods based on the fuzzy hesitant sets theory; and the comparative
evaluation of artificial intelligence techniques aiming to identify ad-
vantages and disadvantages of use when applied to assess the perfor-
mance of supply chains.


Acknowledgement


To FAPESP (2016/14618-4) and CAPES (Phd scholarship – code
001) for funding this study.


References


Akkoç, S. (2012). An empirical comparison of conventional techniques, neural networks
and the three stage hybrid Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) model for
credit scoring analysis: The case of Turkish credit card data. European Journal of
Operational Research, 222, 168–178.


APICS, 2018. American Production and Inventory Control Society. Benchmark your
Supply Chain: Close Performance Gaps. http://www.apics.org/sites/apics-supply-
chain-council/products-and-services/benchmarking.


Aengchuan, P., & Phruksaphanrat, B. (2018). Comparison of fuzzy inference system (FIS),
FIS with artificial neural networks (FIS+ANN) and FIS with adaptive neuro-fuzzy
inference system (FIS+ANFIS) for inventory control. Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, 29, 905–923.


Akkawuttiwanich, P., & Yenradee, P. (2018). Fuzzy QFD approach for managing SCOR
performance indicators. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 122, 189–201.


Akyuz, G. A., & Erkan, T. E. (2010). Supply chain performance measurement: A literature
review. International Journal of Production Economics, 48, 5137–5155.


Bai, C., Sarkis, J., Wei, X., & Koh, L. (2012). Evaluating ecological sustainable perfor-
mance measures for supply chain management. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 17, 78–92.


Bals, L., Schulze, H., Kelly, S., & Stek, K. (2019). Purchasing and supply management
(PSM) competencies: Current and future requirements. Journal of Purchasing and
Supply Management, 25 100572.


Beamon, B. M. (1999). Measuring supply chain performance. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management, 19, 275–292.


Brandenburg, M., Govindan, K., Sarkis, J., & Seuring, S. (2014). Quantitative models for
managing supply chain risks. Europen Journal of Operational Research, 233, 299–312.


Bukhori, I. B., Widodo, K. H., & Ismoyowati, D. (2015). Evaluation of poultry supply chain
performance in XYZ slaughtering house Yogyakarta using SCOR and AHP method.
Agriculture and Agricultural Science Procedia, 3, 221–225.


Büyüközkan, G., & Göçer, F. (2018). Digital supply chain: Literature review and a pro-
posed framework for future research. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 97,
157–177.


Chopra, S., & Meindl, P. (2013). Supply chain management: Strategy, planning and operation
(5th ed.). Pearson, Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.


Chorfi, Z., Benabbou, L., & Berrado, A. (2018). An integrated performance measurement
framework for enhancing public health care supply chains. Supply Chain Forum: An
International Journal, 19, 191–203.


Clivillé, V., & Berrah, L. (2012). Overall performance measurement in a supply chain:
Towards a supplier-prime manufacturer based model. Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, 23, 2459–2469.


Delipinar, G. E., & Kocaoglu, B. (2016). Using SCOR model to gain competitive ad-
vantage: A Literature review. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 229, 398–406.


Dewan, M. W., Huggett, D. J., Liao, T. W., Wahab, M. A., & Okeil, A. M. (2016). Prediction
of tensile strength of friction stir weld joints with adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
system (ANFIS) and neural network. Materials and Design, 92, 288–299.


Dias, L. S., & Ierapetritou, M. G. (2017). From process control to supply chain manage-
ment: An overview of integrated decision making strategies. Computers & Chemical
Engineering, 106, 826–835.


Didehkhani, H., Jassbi, J., & Pilevari, N. (2009). Assessing flexibility in supply chain using
adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system. IEEE International Conference On Industrial
Engineering And Engineering Management (IEEM, 2009), Hong-Kong.


Dissanayake, C. K., & Cross, J. A. (2018). Systematic mechanism for identifying the re-
lative impact of supply chain performance areas on the overall supply chain perfor-
mance using SCOR model and SEM. International Journal of Production Economics,
201, 102–115.


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Childe, S. J., Shibin, K. T., & Wamba, S. F.
(2017). Sustainable supply chain management: Framework and further research di-
rections. Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 1119–1130.


Efendigil, T., & Önüt, S. (2012). An integration methodology based on fuzzy inference
systems and neural approaches for multi-stage supply-chains. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 62, 554–569.


Elgazzar, S., Tipi, N., & Jones, G. (2019). Key characteristics for designing a supply chain
performance measurement system. International Journal of Productivity and
Performance Management, 68, 296–318.


Erdas, O., Andac, C. A., Gurkan-Alp, A. S., Alpaslan, F., & Buyukbingol, E. (2013).
Compressed images for affinity prediction (CIFAP): A study on predicting binding
affinities for checkpoint kinase 1 protein inhibitors. Chemometrics, 27, 155–164.


Estampe, D., Lamouri, S., Paris, J., & Brahim-Djelloul, S. (2013). A framework for ana-
lysing supply chain performance evaluation models. International Journal of
Production Economics, 142, 247–258.


Fan, X., Zhang, S., Wang, L., Yang, Y., & Hapeshi, K. (2013). An evaluation model of
supply chain performances using 5DBSC and LMBP neural network algorithm.
Journal of Bionic Engineering, 10, 383–395.


Ganga, G. M. D., & Carpinetti, L. C. R. (2011). A fuzzy logic approach to supply chain
performance management. International Journal of Production Economics, 134,
177–187.


Golparvar, M., & Seifbarghy, M. (2009). Application of SCOR model in an oil- producing
company. Journal of Industrial Engineering, 4, 59–69.


Guersola, M., Lima, E. P., & Steiner, M. T. A. (2018). Supply chain performance mea-
surement: A systematic literature review. Int. J. Logistics Systems and Management, 31,
109–137.


Gunasekaran, A., Patel, C., & Mcgaughey, R. E. (2004). A framework for supply chain
performance measurement. International Journal of Production Economics, 87,
333–347.


Gunasekaran, A., Patel, C., & Tirtiroglu, E. (2001). Performance measures and metrics in a
supply chain environment. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 21, 71–87.


Güneri, A. F., Ertay, T., & Yücel, A. (2011). An approach based on ANFIS input selection
and modeling for supplier selection problem. Expert Systems with Applications, 38,
14907–14917.


Handfield, R. B., & Nichols, E. L. (1999). Introduction to supply chain management. Prentice-
Hall.


Jalalvand, F., Teimoury, E., Makui, A., Aryanezhad, M. B., & Jolai, F. (2011). A method to
compare supply chains of an industry. Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal, 16, 82–97.


Jang, J. S. R. (1993). ANFIS: adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 23, 665–685.


Jassbi, J., Seyedhosseini, S. M., & Pilevari, N. (2010). An adaptive neuro fuzzy inference
system for supply chain agility evaluation. International Journal Of Industrial
Engineering & Production Research, 20, 187–196.


Kar, S., Das, S., & Ghosh, P. K. (2014). Applications of neuro fuzzy systems: A brief review
and future outline. Applied Soft Computing, 15, 243–259.


Ko, M., Tiwari, A., & Mehnen, J. (2010). A review of soft computing applications in
supply chain management. Applied Soft Computing, 10, 661–674.


Kocaoglu, B., Gülsün, B., & Tanya, M. (2013). A SCOR based approach for measuring a
benchmarkable supply chain performance. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 24,
113–132.


Kolus, A., Imbeau, D., Dubé, P., & Dubeau, D. (2015). Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
systems with k-fold cross-validation for energy expenditure predictions based on
heart rate. Applied Ergonomics, 50, 68–78.


Lakri, S., Dallery, Y., & Jemai, Z. (2015). Measurement and management of supply chain
performance: Practices in today’s large companies. Supply Chain Forum: An
International Journal, 16, 16–30.


Lima-Junior, F. R., & Carpinetti, L. C. R. (2017). Quantitative models for supply chain
performance evaluation: A literature review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 113,
333–346.


Lima-Junior, F. R., & Carpinetti, L. C. R. (2019). Predicting supply chain performance
based on SCOR® metrics and multilayer perceptron neural networks. International
Journal of Production Economics, 212, 19–38.


Liu, F. F., & Liu, Y. (2017). A methodology to assess the supply chain performance based
on gap-based measures. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 110, 550–559.


Makris, D., Hansen, Z. N. L., & Khan, O. (2019). Adapting to supply chain 4.0: An ex-
plorative study of multinational companies. Supply Chain Forum: An International
Journal, 20, 116–131.


Mathworks. MATLAB® Fuzzy Logic Tool™ - Users'Guide. The MathWorks, Inc., USA,
March 2019.


Melnyk, S. A., Narasimhan, R., & Decampos, H. A. (2014). Supply chain design: Issues,
challenges, frameworks and solutions. International Journal of Production Research, 52,
1887–1896.


Melnyk, S. A., Stewart, D. M., & Swink, M. S. A. (2004). Metrics and performance mea-
surement in operations management: Dealing with the metrics maze. Journal of
Operations Management, 22, 209–217.


Mentzer, J. T., Witt, W., Keebler, J. S., Min, S., Nix, N., & Smith, C. D. (2001). Defining
supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics, 22, 1–25.


Moharamkhani, A., Bozorgi-Amiri, A., & Mina, H. (2017). Supply chain performance
measurement using SCOR model based on interval-valued fuzzy TOPSIS. International
Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 27.


Montgomery, D. C., & Runger, G. C. (2011). Applied statistics and probability for engineers
(5th ed.). John Wiley & Sons.


Najmi, A., Gholamian, M. R., & Makui, A. (2013). Supply chain performance models: A
literature review on approaches, techniques, and criteria. Journal of Operations and
Supply Chain Management, 6, 94–113.


Ntabe, E. N., LeBel, L., Munson, A. D., & Santa-Eulalia, L. A. (2015). A systematic lit-
erature review of the supply chain operations reference (SCOR) model application
with special attention to environmental issues. International Journal of Production
Economics, 109, 310–332.


Osiro, L., Lima-Junior, F. R., & Carpinetti, L. C. R. (2018). A group decision model based


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9000

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9000

http://www.apics.org/sites/apics-supply-chain-council/products-and-services/benchmarking

http://www.apics.org/sites/apics-supply-chain-council/products-and-services/benchmarking

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0005

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9010

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0025

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9015

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0040

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0045

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0050

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0055

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0060

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0065

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0070

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0075

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0080

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0085

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0090

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0095

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0125

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9020

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0150

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0175

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0180

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9030

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0185

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0190

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0205

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0210

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0215

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0220

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0225

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0230

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0235




on quality function deployment and hesitant fuzzy for selecting supply chain sus-
tainability metrics. Journal of Cleaner Production, 183, 964–978.


Özkan, G., & Inal, M. (2014). Comparison of neural network application for fuzzy and
ANFIS approaches for multi-criteria decision making problems. Applied Soft
Computing, 24, 232–238.


Qi, Y., Huo, B., Wang, Z., & Yeung, H. Y. J. (2017). The impact of operations and supply
chain strategies on integration and performance. International Journal of Production
Economics, 185, 162–174.


Rajab, S., & Sharma, V. (2018). A review on the applications of neuro-fuzzy systems in
business. Artificial Intelligence Review, 49(4).


SCC - Supply chain council. (2012). Supply chain operations reference model, version 11.
0. Supply Chain Council, 2012.


Sellitto, M. A., Pereira, G. M., Borchardt, M., Silva, R., & Viegas, C. V. (2015). A SCOR-
based model for supply chain performance measurement: Application in the footwear
industry. International Journal of Production Research, 53, 4917–4926.


Seuring, S., & Müller, M. (2008). From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16, 1699–1710.


Sundarakani, B., Razzak, H. A., & Manikandan, S. (2018). Creating a competitive ad-
vantage in the global flight catering supply chain: A case study using SCOR model.


International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 21, 481–501. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13675567.2018.1448767.


Tavana, M., Fallahpour, A., Caprio, D., & Santos-Arteaga, F. (2016). A hybrid intelligent
fuzzy predictive model with simulation for supplier evaluation and selection. Expert
Systems with Applications, 61, 129–144.


Theeranuphattana, A., & Tang, J. C. S. (2008). A conceptual model of performance
measurement for supply chains: Alternative considerations. Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management, 19, 125–148.


Unahabhokha, C., Platts, K., & Tan, H. T. (2007). Predictive performance measurement
system: A fuzzy expert system approach. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 14,
77–91.


Wang, H. (2013). Research on supply chain performance evaluation of fresh agricultural
products. INMATEH - Agricultural Engineering, 40, 36–42.


Yang, J., & Jiang, H. (2012). Fuzzy evaluation on supply chains’ overall performance
based on AHM and M(1,2,3). Journal of software, 12, 2779–2786.


Zhang, W., & Reimann, M. (2014). Towards a multi-objective performance assessment
and optimization model of a two-echelon supply chain using SCOR metrics. Central
European Journal of Operations Research, 22, 591–622.


F.R. Lima-Junior and L.C.R. Carpinetti



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0235

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0240

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0245

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h9035

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0255

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0260

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0260

https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2018.1448767

https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2018.1448767

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0270

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0275

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0280

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0285

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0290

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0295

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0360-8352(19)30660-6/h0295


