









Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


Available online 13 June 2020
0301-4207/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


Analysis of supply chain sustainability with supply chain complexity, 
inter-relationship study using delphi and interpretive structural modeling 
for Indian mining and earthmoving machinery industry 


Pushpendu Chand a,*, Jitesh J. Thakkar b, Kunal Kanti Ghosh a 


a Vinod Gupta School of Management, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur, India 
b Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur, India  


A B S T R A C T   


The context of the sustainable supply chain (SSC) is progressively getting attention among supply chain (SC) managers due to its competitive advantage in firms’ 
performance. Increasing supply chain complexity (SCC) is argued as one of the biggest risks in achieving the organisational goal with an adverse impact on oper-
ational efficiency, cost, profitability, on-time delivery, and customer satisfaction. Though drivers of SSC and SCC have seemingly demonstrated mutual relationship in 
a practical scenario, supply chain managers tend to address respective drivers independently for managing and controlling. Limited availability of literature 
investigating interactions among drivers of SSC and SCC with its overall impact on the supply chain motivates deeper research. To address the gap, current research 
aims to study the mutual relationship between SSC and SCC drivers. To achieve this, a combination of sequential exploratory two-phased research methodology is 
adopted. The Delphi technique is initially applied to identify the critical SSC and SCC drivers followed by using interpretive structural modeling (ISM) to decipher the 
mutual relationship among the SSC and SCC drivers. The interactions between SSC and SCC drivers explored in this work will provide supply chain managers a 
framework for informed decision making. The driving and dependence power of drivers can guide SC practitioners to prioritize and focus on key drivers with a high 
impact on the overall outcome. The organization can also be benefitted by managing SSC and SCC drivers in synergy against the silo approach. The research finding 
suggests that market uncertainty, institutional regulations, strategic supplier collaboration, customer pressure, and new technologies are key five drivers in decision- 
making.   


1. Introduction 


“Looking at the world through a sustainability lens not only helps us 
‘future proof’ our supply chain, but it also fuels innovation and drives 
brand growth.” The statement from a former CEO of Unilever and 
Chairman of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(WBCSD) underscores the importance of adopting sustainability in the 
supply chain. The context of sustainable supply chain (SSC) is progres-
sively getting attention among supply chain managers as an important 
topic for discussions due to incessant pressure from stakeholders; 
therefore, organisations are critically exploring opportunities to incor-
porate sustainable practices in their supply chain (Hsu et al., 2013; 
Flynn et al., 2016; Saeed and Kersten, 2019). 


In the context of supply chain complexity (SCC), a former executive 
vice president of global supply chain operations for Open Energy Cor-
poration commented, “complexity is destroying profitability in many 
companies and companies must reduce complexity if they are to survive 
and be profitable in a sustainable fashion” (Gilmore, 2008). In a 2016 


survey conducted by Gartner involving supply chain leaders from 
different organisations, 63 percent of participants have informed 
“increasing supply chain complexity” as the highest risk to business 
continuity. A white paper released by a global logistics firm Geodis 
(2017) on supply chain worldwide survey, reported that ‘70% of 
respondent assessed their supply chain as very or extremely complex’. 
The survey findings signify the inherent complexity of the supply chain 
and the importance of managing supply chain complexities to improve 
delivery performance. 


Researchers have enriched the literature of sustainable supply chain 
management (SSCM) by identification of various drivers, prioritization, 
their mutual relationship and managerial implication in decision mak-
ing (Seuring and Muller, 2008; Dubey et al., 2017; Saeed et al., 2017; 
Varsei et al., 2014). SSC drivers are categorized as external and internal 
factors based on their source and influence the organization (Hassini 
et al., 2012; Varsei et al., 2014). Strategic supplier development (Kumar 
and Rahman, 2016), supply chain collaboration (Chen et al., 2017), 
government legislation, international regulations, customer pressure, 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: pushpendu.chand@gmail.com (P. Chand), jt@iem.iitkgp.ernet.in, jtiitkgp@gmail.com (J.J. Thakkar), kunal@vgsom.iitkgp.ernet.in 


(K.K. Ghosh).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


Resources Policy 


journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/resourpol 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726 
Received 27 February 2020; Received in revised form 11 May 2020; Accepted 12 May 2020   



























mailto:pushpendu.chand@gmail.com

mailto:jt@iem.iitkgp.ernet.in

mailto:jtiitkgp@gmail.com

mailto:kunal@vgsom.iitkgp.ernet.in

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03014207

https://http://www.elsevier.com/locate/resourpol

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726&domain=pdf




Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


2


corporate strategy (Saeed and Kersten, 2019), stakeholders’ pressure 
(Meixell and Luoma, 2015) are some of the highlighted drivers for SSC. 


Similarly, the available literature adequately studied SCC and its 
drivers due to its critical impact on overall supply chain management 
(Serdarasan, 2013; Bozarth et al., 2009; Mariotti, 2008). For effective 
and efficient management of complexity, firms’ managers should iden-
tify, analyze, define, measure, reduce and control the SCC drivers (Isik, 
2011). The multiplicity of factors, numerousness of decision variables, 
complicated mutual relationship, and different managerial approach to 
performance management has been reported in engendering SCC 
(Manuj and Sahin, 2011). Kavilal et al. (2017) analyzed the SCC through 
a case study of Indian mining equipment manufacturer and identified 
supplier unreliability, inaccuracy in forecasting, lack of visibility, 
number and variety of parts and processes are the dominant drivers. 


Managing SCC drivers can have derived and extended benefits in 
implementing SSC. According to the review conducted by Ahi and 
Searcy (2015), among SSC performance metrics, greenhouse gas emis-
sions, energy consumption and life-cycle assessment (LCA) are identified 
as critical to SSC. Upstream SCC is defined as a combination of hori-
zontal, vertical and spatial SCC (Bode and Wagner, 2015). An increase in 
horizontal SCC (defined as the number of direct suppliers managed by a 
focal firm) results in a higher number of supplier interfaces to manage. 
Hence implementation of end-to-end sustainable practices through 
strategic supplier collaboration becomes a growing challenge, which is 
likely to prevent joint deployment of sustainable development. Spatial 
SCC, caused due to globalised distributed sourcing of supply chain, re-
fers geographical distribution of suppliers. An extended spatial network 
of suppliers entails elongated transportation networks for physical 
movement of material resulting in higher vehicular emission and 
increased energy consumption (Geng et al., 2017). 


Similarly, SSC also brings an overlapping impact on SCC. To imple-
ment sustainability in supply chain practices, firms often adopt strategic 
supplier collaboration and logistics optimization (Dubey et al., 2017) to 
gain the environmental and economic benefit of collaboration. These 
initiatives effectively result in a simpler supply chain network with 
diminished SCC. With increased regulation and customer’s demand for 
sustainable products and services, firms’ supply chains are continuously 
engaged on resourcing, recycling, life-cycle assessment, emission con-
trol which generates the varying level of impact on SCC in inventory 
management, lead time and demand planning (Katiyar et al., 2018). 


Due to the impact of SSC and SCC on key supply chain processes 
involving planning, sourcing, executing, it is imperative for the focal 
firm to devise SC strategy considering both aspects simultaneously. 
Therefore, establishing the inter-relationship among the drivers of SSC 
and SCC will enable the supply chain managers to create a cohesive 
strategy for decision-making. According to the combined study of SSC 
and SCC drivers through ISM methodology, the obtained driving and 
dependence power of drivers will guide supply chain managers to focus 
on key drivers. Rather than addressing SSC and SCC individually, a 
combined evaluation of drivers is more appropriate to explain complex 
interaction among drivers. The relative scarcity of literature on this 
subject emanates the need for further study on the mutual relationship. 


Serdarasan (2013) proved that managing and controlling SCC leads 
to increased performance and improved performance. Bode and Wagner 
(2015) established that a reduction in SCC would diminish the risk of 
disruption. In the quest towards building SSC, firms have adopted 
multiple SSC drivers like strategic supplier collaboration, continuous 
improvement, environment conservation, green product design (Dubey 
et al., 2017). Um and Kim (2018) argued that successful supply chain 
collaboration decreases transaction costs and improves firms’ economic 
performance. An optimized logistics operation enables the firm in 
achieving the twin goal of reduced carbon footprint and lessened energy 
consumption, which results in lower operating costs and improved 
financial performance (Dey et al., 2011). Environment sustainability 
and green product design results in firms’ higher resource efficiency, 
enhanced corporate image and increased sales (Dangelico and Pujari, 


2010). 
The context of SSC and SCC being critical for firms’ overall supply 


chain performance is adequately discussed in literature. A considerable 
amount of research established that the subject of SSC and SCC should be 
included in firms’ supply chain strategy and risk management. Seem-
ingly, management of SSC and SCC improves delivery, reduces cost, 
increases supply chain collaboration, and creates competitive advan-
tage. Having acknowledged the importance of SSC and SCC, supply 
chain practitioners are taking important initiatives in managing and 
controlling their respective drivers. But the relative scarcity of study 
combining SSC and SCC drivers for priority ranking, their interdepen-
dence, and managerial implications leaves enough scope for investiga-
tion. This research is motivated to answer the following research 
questions (RQ): 


RQ1: What are the critical drivers for the integrated management of 
SSC and SCC? 


RQ2: How is the mutual relationship and the level of interdepen-
dence among the SSC and SCC drivers? 


RQ3: How supply chain managers should approach in controlling 
these drivers for achieving a positive result? 


RQ4: How industry can be benefitted by the research outcome of this 
exploratory study? 


1.1. A brief overview of Indian earthmoving and mining machinery 


Construction and mining industry play a crucial role in economic 
growth and job creation due to its significant contribution towards 
infrastructure, steel, power, construction, housing development (Modak 
et al., 2017). Indian earthmoving and mining industry contribute about 
10%–11% to the industrial sector and accounts for 2.2%–2.5% to 
economy’s gross domestic product (Ministry of Mines, Annual report 
2016–17). Mining and construction industry is considered as one of the 
key drivers in creating employment and economic development in many 
countries (Luthra et al., 2015). Earthmoving and mining machinery 
manufacturing industry plays a major role in driving the growth of the 
industry with a domino effect on the overall economy. The sector con-
tributes significantly in execution of flagship infrastructural programs of 
Indian government for building highway and railway network, urban 
housing, rural road connectivity, development of smart cities, rural 
broadband connectivity, rural electrification, agricultural irrigation, 
port and airport development. This industry is experiencing steady de-
mand due to increased government spending on infrastructure, growing 
economic activity, relaxation of FDI norms, favorable policy framework 
through de-licensing. This industry is estimated to attain the market 
revenue of Rs 35,000 crore by the financial year 2020 (Department of 
Heavy Industries, 2016–17) with increasing participation from global 
and local manufacturers like Tata-Hitachi, Kobelco, Terex, L&T, Case- 
New Holland, Komatsu, Caterpillar, John-Deere, JCB, Sany, Escorts, TIL, 
Metso, Atlas-Copco, Sandvik, Manitowoc, Volvo, Doosan, Tadano, 
Hyundai. 


The Indian government reconstituted Development Council for 
construction, earthmoving and mining machinery. These Development 
Councils were formed to create an access forum for the participation of 
key stakeholders, machinery manufacturing organisations, customers, 
business leaders, and industry experts to deliberate on current industry 
trends and to contemplate on strategic planning and actions for imple-
mentation of the sustainable growth. Presently the Indian market has 
witnessed the presence of more than 40 large and global manufacturers 
of earthmoving & mining machinery with participation from around 
200 small-size enterprises. The product range involves Hydraulic 
Excavator, Backhoe Loaders, Wheel Loaders, Vibratory Compactors, 
Crushing and Screening Plants, Truck Mounted Cranes, Batching Plants, 
Tower Cranes, Dump trucks, Dozers, Motor Graders, etc. Indian 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  














Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


3


earthmoving and mining machinery industry has been growing consis-
tently from last three years with the compounded annual growth rate of 
16% during the financial year 2013-14 to 2016-17 and recorded turn-
over of Rs 24,945 crore (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public En-
terprises, 2017–18). Indian construction and infrastructure sector 
cumulatively have received FDI of USD 39 billion from April 2000 to 
December 2018 due to increased government spending towards infra-
structure development coupled with favorable policy framework (FDI 
factsheet, DIPP, February 2019). Construction, earthmoving equipment, 
and mining machinery industry have benefitted from this growth. The 
sector has experienced sustained demand due to higher budget alloca-
tion in development of rail infrastructure, mass rapid transport and 
metro project, road, port, highways, irrigation, power, urban rejuve-
nation, sanitation, smart city, airports. 


1.2. Sustainable supply chain initiatives by earthmoving and mining 
machinery 


Existing literature has not adequately presented the actions initiated 
by firms’ operating in earthmoving and mining machinery business. 
Therefore, to understand the subject better, supply chain experts with 
significant experience in the industry were consulted for insightful dis-
cussion; firms’ homepages were also studied to explore recent industry 
trends. Experts have emphasized that firms are progressively taking 
sustainable drives in managing their supply chain to reduce environ-
mental degradation and to become a responsible brand. JCB, a global 
earthmoving equipment manufacturing firm, headquartered at UK and 
serving Indian market from decades, is encouraging its supply chain 
partners for returnable stackable packaging solutions for better vehicle 
space utilisation resulting in lower carbon emission and use of trans-
portation vehicles powered by dual-fuel compressed natural gas 
adhering to upgraded emission norms (https://www.jcb.com 
/en-in/company/sustainable-solutions/distribution). During our inter-
action, supply chain managers shared that firms have embarked upon 
the journey of sustainability audits with its extended supplier network to 
improve adherence on the environment through strategic supplier 
collaboration. A leading Japanese multinational company, manufac-
turer of construction & mining machinery, has reduced the environ-
mental impact of carbon emission by shifting the mode of transportation 
from roadways to the usage of ports and waterways. A Niti Ayog report 
on ‘Sustainable Development Goal’, aimed with the purpose of mapping 
central sector schemes and ministries under government of India, rec-
ommended Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to 
encourage larger organisations to implement sustainable practices and 
include the sustainability reporting by year 2030 (Niti Ayog, Sustainable 
development goals, August 2018). 


1.3. Supply chain complexity management practices in earthmoving and 
mining machinery industry 


“In our industry, the competitor that’s best at managing the supply 
chain is probably going be the most successful competitor over time. It’s 
a condition of success.” The comments from the former chairman and 
CEO of construction and mining equipment manufacturer, with a sig-
nificant operating presence in India, underscores the importance of 
managing supply chains for global organisations in adapting growing 
uncertainty and complexity (McKinsey conversations with global 
leaders, November 2010). A leading European construction equipment 
manufacturer has developed a complimentary supply chain hub model 
for group’s excavator attachment business to reduce SCC by simplifying 
the operating complexities. This has enabled the firm to improve 
customer satisfaction by reducing supply lead time, improving 
competitiveness through cost efficiency and driving future business 
growth for global operations. DHL, JCB’s worldwide logistics partner, 
has aligned itself with JCB’s vision and customized supply chain solu-
tions to improve customer-centricity and competitive advantage. DHL, 


in its report, Building the World, surmised that the supply chain of 
construction equipment industry will experience challenges from 
changing need of a customers, growing regulations and compliances, the 
emergence of new technologies and skillful resource (DHL-Building the 
World, 2015). Caterpillar, one of the world’s largest manufacturers of 
mining machinery, introduced big data analysis and incorporated digital 
tools to manage supply chain complexity with control the variability of 
demand and inventory management (Reiss, 2015). To overcome supply 
chain complexity, Komatsu, a Japan-based firm has adopted a mixed 
approach of global and local sourcing to improve supply chain efficiency 
by managing fluctuating demand. 


1.4. A discussion on present status of SSC and SCC specific to 
earthmoving and mining machinery industry 


To conduct our research work, we formally met with some of the 
industry practitioners at their respective manufacturing plants located 
in western India. Some SC managers discussed KPIs with us and ‘action 
plan roadmap’ to improve them consistently. We experienced that ma-
jority of the firms are concerned with growing supply chain complexity 
and its impact on performance. We are summarizing below the major 
initiatives adopted by firms to reduce SCC.  


a) A leading mining machine manufacturer is systematically reducing 
the horizontal supply chain complexity (number of suppliers that a 
focal firm deals directly) by reducing supplier base by 22 percent in 
the next three years to reduce transactional cost and to improve 
resource efficiency through enhanced coordination.  


b) To reduce inventory long-lead imported components, some of the 
firms are developing alternate sources in a drive termed as “Locali-
zation” and “Resourcing”. This enables the firms to significantly 
reduce inventory carrying costs and uncertainty associated with 
multi-modal cross-country transportation. Two similar examples 
were cited where leading Japanese manufacturers of hydraulic 
pump, gearbox set-up their manufacturing plant in India to supply 
the Indian manufacturers.  


c) The majority of the manufacturers are developing a wider dealership 
network to create a more geographically dispersed network with a 
minimum inventory of final product to reduce customer order cycle 
time.  


d) Many of the surveyed manufacturing firms are implementing Total 
Quality Management (TQM), Total Productive Maintenance (TPM), 
Advanced Product Quality Planning (APQP), environmental certifi-
cation as a part of strategic supplier collaboration. 


We would like to highlight the following critical limitations observed 
in most of the mining machine manufacturing firms:  


a) KPIs of SCC have negligible inclusion of SSC drivers; conversely, SSC 
KPIs do not carry any SCC drivers.  


b) Typically, SCC and sustainability are managed by two distinct 
functions with a little overlap on drivers and respective functions.  


c) Many of the sustainability drives are not reflective of SC performance 
and are not aligned to the business goal. 


This research work is intended to identify the critical drivers in in-
tegrated management of sustainable supply chain and supply chain 
complexity for Indian mining machinery manufacturing industry. The 
mutual relationship and level of interdependence among SSC and SCC 
drivers is investigated with important industry insights from practi-
tioners and academic experts. The research findings of this paper 
contribute towards managerial decision making for supply chain man-
agers in strategizing their approach. Our research work enriches the 
existing literature on SSC, SCC and extends the understanding to benefit 
the practitioners and academicians. 


Rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a summary of 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  







https://www.jcb.com/en-in/company/sustainable-solutions/distribution

https://www.jcb.com/en-in/company/sustainable-solutions/distribution




Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


4


the systematic literature review is outlined. We have explained the 
research methodology in Section 3. Results are tabulated and presented 
in Section 4. Section 5 presents results and managerial implication 
respectively. Section 6 concludes the research work limitations of the 
present work and opens direction for further investigation. 


2. Literature review 


The systematic literature review was performed as per the guidelines 
suggested by Tranfield et al. (2003) and Denyer and Tranfield (2009) for 
a deeper understanding on SSC and SCC drivers. The literature review 
was conducted to identify the SSC and SCC drivers captured in literature. 
The applied keywords were: “supply chain complexity”, “sustainable 
supply chain”, “drivers”, “enablers”, “supply chain management”, 
“mining machinery”, “earth-moving machinery”, “manufacturing”, 
“sustainability”. The published research papers and books were 
searched using the keywords from reputed peer-review journal data-
bases in the areas of sustainability, sustainable supply chain manage-
ment, production, and operations management. The resource database 
used for accessing the papers were: Wiley, Sage, Google Scholar, Science 
Direct, SCOPUS, Emerald, Springer. Following criterion were followed 
for selection of the paper:  


! The papers must be peer-reviewed, written in the English language.  
! The papers are published between 2000 and 2020.  
! The research paper address subject of either SSC or SCC. 


The search process resulted in shortlisting 117 papers for further 
study and evaluation. Based on the literature review, a list of five SSC 
drivers and 10 SCC drivers were identified as input for the Delphi study. 
The selected drivers of SSC and SCC are defined and presented in Table 1 
and Table 2. The clustering of SCC drivers was primarily based on the 
published research work by Chand et al. (2018). 


2.1. Sustainable supply chain (SSC) and drivers 


“Sustainability is a worldwide concern that continues to gain 
momentum—especially in countries where growing populations are 
putting additional stress on the environment, and an increasing number 
of consumers in developed regions consider sustainability actions more 
of an imperative than a value-add.” This statement from the former se-
nior vice president, Public Development & Sustainability, Nielsen 
highlighted the critical acknowledgment of sustainability as one of the 
pressing business needs (Nielsen Global Corporate Sustainability Report, 
2015). “Sustainable supply chain management is the strategic, trans-
parent integration and achievement of an organization’s social, envi-
ronmental, and economic goals in the systemic coordination of key 
inter-organisational business processes for improving the long-term 
economic performance of the individual organization and its supply 
chains” (Carter and Rogers, 2008). Asefeso (2015) defined supply chain 
sustainability as “a holistic perspective of supply chain processes and 
technologies that go beyond the focus of delivery, inventory and tradi-
tional views of cost”. The HSBC Navigator survey, conducted on behalf 
of HSBC by Kantar TNS in 2018, covering 350 businesses in India, sur-
mised that 26% of respondents considered ‘improving the sustainability 
of supply chain’ as one of the top 5 supply chain changes for next 3 years 
(HSBC Navigator Survey, 2018). 


“Supply chain sustainability is the management of environmental, 
social and economic impacts and the encouragement of good gover-
nance practices throughout the life cycles of goods and services” (United 
Nations Global Compact, 2016). Sustainable supply chain management 
(SSCM) aims to analyze three critical dimensions (environmental, eco-
nomic, and social) of sustainable development based on “Triple Bottom 
Line (TBL)" approach (Seuring and Muller, 2008). Supply chain man-
agement involves the processing of raw material and information flow 
from the initial stage to final product delivery to end-user; therefore, 


Table 1 
Sustainable supply chain drivers.  


Serial 
No. 


Sustainable 
supply chain 
drivers 


Category Description Literature 
reference 


1 Institutional 
pressures 
(Laws and 
regulations 
imposed by 
government, 
regional or 
international 
regulations) 


Sustainability Supply chains 
are progressively 
becoming global 
in scope of 
operation and 
exposed to 
vulnerability of 
changing 
regulations 
imposed by trade 
governing. Any 
sudden changes 
of these trade 
and 
environmental 
policies may 
potentially 
disrupt the 
supply chain. 


Zhu and Sarkis 
(2007), Hsu 
et al. (2013), 


2 Societal 
pressures 
(Social values 
and ethics) 


Sustainability Different societal 
groups, non- 
government 
organisations, 
public awareness 
programs, active 
social and mass 
media 
combinedly 
influence 
organisations to 
adopt 
sustainability 
objectives in 
their business 
strategy and 
improve on 
performance. 


Ageron et al. 
(2012), Saeed 
et al. (2017),  
Walker et al. 
(2008), Alblas 
et al. (2014) 


3 Strategic 
supplier 
collaboration 


Sustainability Aligning the 
suppliers with 
focal firms’ 
corporate 
strategy, 
engaging them 
towards meeting 
organisations’ 
business 
objective is 
critically 
important to 
achieving overall 
goal. 


Freeman 
(2010),  
Giunipero et al. 
(2012), Kumar 
et al. (2016) 


4 Market 
pressure 


Sustainability Growing 
customer 
awareness, 
competitive 
advantage in 
peer group, 
external pressure 
from various 
stakeholders in 
accepting 
sustainable 
environmental 
practices and 
effort to establish 
a corporate 
responsible 
brand are forcing 
organisations to 
orient itself 
towards 


Gualandris and 
Kalchschmidt 
(2014),  
Govindan 
(2016) 


(continued on next page) 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






















Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


5


adoption of sustainability practices in the supply chain is a critical step 
forward in the right direction (Ashby et al., 2012). Implementation of 
SSC management combining social and environmental drivers results 
positively on corporate financial performance (Wang and Sarkis, 2013). 
Giannakis and Papadopoulos (2016) established that SSC should be 
considered in firms’ risk treatment strategies. Bai and Sarkis (2018) have 
developed a methodology for evaluating and mitigating SSC complexity, 
which can help supply chain managers in managerial decision making. 
Luzzini et al. (2015) argued that firms’ sustainability commitment de-
velops intra and inter-firm collaborative strength resulting into 
enhanced performance. Implementation of SSC initiatives result in 
benefitting the firms’ through competitive advantage, value creation 
and reverse logistics (Hsu et al., 2016; Jayaraman and Luo, 2007). 


The growing social awareness on sustainability, increasing adher-
ence of laws and regulations imposed by governing bodies, rising pref-
erence of customers to accept sustainable products and services, are 
important drivers forcing organisations to incorporate sustainable 
practices in their supply chain operations (Mathiyazhagan and Haq, 
2013; Diabat et al., 2014; Flynn et al., 2016). Researchers have 
adequately explored the motivation for adoption supply chain sustain-
ability and synonymously applied enablers, drivers, pressures, triggers 
to highlight factors that encourage or/and facilitate the implementation 
of sustainable practices (Hsu et al., 2013; Koksal et al., 2017; Saeed and 
Kersten, 2019). Walker and Jones (2012) developed a typology for 
sustainable supply chain based on a variety of organisational approach 
and defined enablers as encouraging factors for adoption of sustainable 
SCM. Identification, prioritization, and mutual relationship of sustain-
able supply chain drivers are well-documented by researchers through 
literature reviews (Dubey et al., 2017; Koksal et al., 2017; Saeed and 
Kersten, 2019). A summary of the literature review on sustainable 
supply chain drivers are mentioned in Table 1 and categorized under 
‘sustainability’ as suggested in the literature. 


2.2. Supply chain complexity (SCC) and drivers 


To emphasize the criticality of supply chain complexity, former vice 
president of a world’s leading beverage company responsible for supply 
chain, commented, “If you are in supply chain management today, then 
complexity is cancer you have to fight” (Gilmore, 2008). It is argued by 
researchers and industry experts that SCC is considered as one of the 
most difficult problems that organisations are dealing in today’s supply 
chain (Bode and Wagner, 2015; Bozarth et al., 2009). BSI and Business 
Continuity Institute Nielsen Global Corporate Sustainability Report 


Table 1 (continued ) 
Serial 
No. 


Sustainable 
supply chain 
drivers 


Category Description Literature 
reference 


sustainable 
supply chain. 


5 Corporate 
strategy 


Sustainability Inclusion of 
sustainability in 
organisations’ 
business 
strategy, 
commitment 
from top 
management 
towards 
achieving the 
same, improving 
operational and 
economic 
performance are 
crucial factors in 
implementing 
sustainable SC 
practices. 


Walker et al. 
(2008),  
Schrettle et al. 
(2014),  


Table 2 
Supply chain complexity drivers.  


Serial 
No. 


Supply chain 
complexity 
drivers 


Category Description Literature 
reference 


1 Number of 
suppliers 


Upstream Complexity and 
uncertainty in 
supply chain 
experienced by a 
firm for the 
number of direct 
suppliers is 
considered as 
horizontal 
complexity. 


Choi and Krause 
(2006); Bode 
and Wagner 
(2015); 


2 Spatial 
positioning 
suppliers 


Upstream Spatial 
distribution of 
suppliers 
generates 
complexity in 
managing the 
entire network of 
suppliers. 


Bode and 
Wagner (2015); 


3 Number and 
variety of 
customers 


Downstream In the globalised 
business scenario, 
firms have 
increasingly 
experienced the 
need to provide 
tailor -made 
products and 
solutions which 
suits to customer 
specific 
requirement. To 
fulfil the 
customer demand 
with emphasis on 
mass- 
customisation 
results in 
complexity. 


Gerschberger 
and Hohensinn 
(2013),  
Serdarasan 
(2013), Kavilal 
et al. (2017) 


4 Product Life 
Cycle 


Downstream Growing pace of 
technological 
innovation is 
forcing the 
organisations to 
develop new 
process and 
product suiting to 
customer 
requirement. This 
drives the 
organization to 
develop agile 
business 
strategies in 
inventory 
management, 
logistics 
planning, 
development of 
suppliers and cost 
management. 


Krishnan and 
Gupta (2001),  
Bozarth et al. 
(2009) 


5 Uncertainty in 
the market 


External Growing geo- 
political tension, 
increased 
globalised trade, 
economic 
sanctions, various 
market forces are 
reasons 
responsible for 
market 
uncertainty and 
increases the SCC 
in forecasting, 


Gerschberger 
and Hohensinn 
(2013), Bode 
and Wagner 
(2015), Tarei 
et al. (2018) 


(continued on next page) 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


6


(2015) highlighted that 77% of participating companies recognized SCC 
as ‘the fastest growing risk to business continuity’. Additionally, supply 
chain performance and customer satisfaction can be improved by 
managing and controlling SCC (Serdarasan, 2013). Managing of SCC 
involves identification, prioritization, monitoring, and control of drivers 
of complexity (Isik, 2011). 


SCC is considered as a growing potential risk for business continuity 
(BSI and Business Continuity Institute Nielsen Global Corporate Sus-
tainability Report, 2015). Improved SCC management enhances firms’ 
performance and increases customer satisfaction (Serdarasan, 2013). 
Firms, operating in the supply chain and experiencing complexity, can 
primarily restrict their resource orientation towards addressing critical 
drivers rather than all drivers (Subramanian et al., 2014). 
System-related weaknesses which are seemingly dormant in normal 
situations can be recognized and analyzed by addressing the SCC of the 
firm (Aitken et al., 2016). Fawcet et al. (2012) investigated the cause of 
supply chain complexity and attributed “heterogeneously dispersed re-
sources and complementary competencies” as the major cause for 


generation of SCC. In recent times, supply chain is shaping increasingly 
complex due to multiple drivers such as uncertain market condition, 
technological innovation, shortening product life cycle, specific local 
regulations, cross-border trade relationships and customer demand 
(Gunasekaran et al., 2014; Bode and Wagner, 2015). This encourages 
industry practitioners and researchers to examine the supply chain 
complexity, which is posited as one of the major impediments in 
achieving the business goal (Bozarth et al., 2009; Choi and Krause, 
2006). 


Serdarasan (2013) defined supply chain complexity driver as ‘any 
property of a supply chain which increases complexity’ and classified as 
static, dynamic and decision-making based on the way it is been 
generated. Kavilal et al. (2017) applied an integrated fuzzy approach for 
prioritization, ranking of SCC drivers and established the 
inter-relationship among 14 identified drivers for Indian mining 
equipment manufacturing firms. Serdarasan (2013) explored and 
reviewed SCC drivers experienced by real-life situations and recom-
mended complexity driver with solution strategy pairings for 
decision-makers of firms. Kavilal et al. (2018) clustered 18 identified 
SCC drivers considering the significant dimensions of complexity from 
the Indian automotive industry. Chand et al. (2018) analyzed the 23 SCC 
drivers for Indian mining and construction equipment machinery com-
panies and categorized as upstream, operational, downstream and 
external drivers based on the source of their origination. Critical supply 
chain complexity drivers are mentioned in Table 2 and. 


2.3. Interpretive structural modeling (ISM) and its application in the 
supply chain 


ISM is a well-developed interactive methodology for identifying the 
mutual relationship among specific items in a complex system through 
the creation of a hierarchical model (Mathiyazhagan and Haq, 2013). 
Kavilal et al. (2018) established interdependencies among 18 identified 
SCC drivers applying ISM for the Indian automotive industry. Lim et al. 
(2017) applied ISM to find out driving and dependence power in SSCM 
within the context of knowledge management for textile industry in 
Vietnam. Analysis and identification of the dominant SSCM practices for 
adoption of SSCM in Indian mining and mineral industry were explored 
using ISM by Jia et al. (2015). Raut et al. (2017) presented the mutual 
relationship among critical success factor for the implementation of 
SSCM for Indian oil and gas sector. ISM technique was applied in 
modeling and analysis of SSC (Ghadimi et al., 2019), developing lean 
supply chain (Soni and Kodali., 2016), devising risk prioritization model 
for supply chain risks (Venkatesh et al., 2015), critical success factors of 
humanitarian supply chain (Yadav and Barve., 2015). Vasanthakumar 
et al. (2016) analyzed the of factors influencing lean remanufacturing 
practices using ISM for Indian automotive component remanufacturing 
organisations. ISM also finds its application in analyzing the barrier of 
green textile supply chain management (Majumdar and Sinha., 2018), 
barriers in implementing total productive maintenance (Poduval et al., 
2015), barriers of reverse logistics in computer supply chain (Ali et al., 
2017). Thirupathi and Vinodh (2016) developed a theoretical model to 
indicate the interrelationship among sustainable manufacturing factors 
for Indian automobile component sector. Govindan et al. (2013) iden-
tified important lean, green and resilient measures to improve supply 
chain performance using ISM. Application of ISM to address supply 
chain related issues are tabulated in Table 3. 


2.4. Research gap 


Acknowledging the criticality, the subject of SSC and SCC has drawn 
considerable attention in the existing literature. Researchers and in-
dustry practitioners have enriched the literature by exploring the subject 
of SSC and SCC contextual to various industry perspective. Academi-
cians tend to approach the subject of SSC and SCC independently in 
proposing a framework for managerial decision-making. Industry 


Table 2 (continued ) 
Serial 
No. 


Supply chain 
complexity 
drivers 


Category Description Literature 
reference 


demand planning 
and supplier 
development; 


6 Laws and 
regulations 
imposed by 
the 
government 


External Supply chain 
operations spread 
at various 
geographies are 
often vulnerable 
to the specific 
regional/local 
business laws and 
regulations. It 
increases the 
complexity in 
supply chain as 
firm must devise 
region-specific 
strategies. 


Kavilal et al. 
(2017) 


7 Competition 
from peer 
firms 


External Market 
competition from 
peer firms forces 
the organization 
to actively look 
for differentiated 
offerings and 
thereby causes 
complexity. 


Hashemi et al. 
(2013), Meixell 
and Luoma 
(2015), Saeed 
et al. (2017) 


8 Forecast 
Inaccuracy 


Operational Inaccuracy in 
forecasting are 
caused due to 
multiplicity of 
factors like 
abrupt change in 
demand, lack of 
information flow, 
inaccurate 
market research. 


McCarthy and 
Golicic (2002),  
Lu (2015), 


9 Number of 
products 


Operational This complexity is 
generated due to 
continuous 
market pressure 
for new product 
development 
with mass- 
customisation 
objective. 


Gerschberger 
and Hohensinn 
(2013), Hashemi 
et al. (2013),  
Kavilal et al. 
(2017) 


10 Number of 
processes 


Operational Increase in 
number of 
processes creates 
complexity in 
supply chain. 


Gerschberger 
and Hohensinn 
(2013)  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


7


practitioners often address the issue of SSC and SCC autonomously and 
devise important strategies to monitor and control respective drivers. 
The presence of separate functions to address SSC and SCC drives in 
most of the surveyed firms suggests the apparent disconnection in 
strategy and focus. 


The context of managing SSC and SCC finds significant similar 
motivation for supply chain performance, firms’ risk management, 
organisational cost efficiency, long-term supply chain resilience, 
corporate business strategy. Strategic supplier collaboration, being 
considered as an SSC driver in achieving environmental and economic 
goals enables the firms in reducing SCC by way of collaborative planning 
and forecasting. Likewise, reducing upstream SCC through a less com-
plex supplier network augments in improved logistics networks with 
lesser energy consumption and lower cost (Dubey et al., 2017). Envi-
ronment conservation and green product innovation not only augment 
firms’ resource efficiency and corporate image (Dangelico and Pujari, 
2010), but also influence downstream SCC in warehousing, managing 
product life cycle and meeting customer requirement. 


The relative scarcity of existing literature combining SSC drivers and 
SCC drivers leaves considerable scope for further investigation by joint 
addressal drivers. This research work is intended to address the topic of 
SSC and SCC combining the respective drivers, their inter-relationship, 
driving and dependence power among the drivers. The study will 
guide industry practitioners in managerial decision-making keeping 
overall firms’ perspective on SSC and SCC drivers. 


3. Research methodology 


A combination of sequential exploratory two-phased research 
methodology is applied. The qualitative Delphi technique is initially 
applied to identify the critical SSC and SCC drivers followed by using 
multi-criterion decision making (MCDM) tool ISM to establish a mutual 
relationship among the SSC and SCC drivers. The adopted research 
methodology for this paper is depicted in Fig. 1. 


3.1. Delphi method 


Delphi technique is defined as a method which is structured to 
facilitate a focussed group discussion on a complex problem to arrive at 
group consensus over a series of iterations and to achieve some future 
direction (Loo, 2002; Linstone and Turoff, 2002). As guided by Loo 
(2002), due attention was paid in designing, planning and executing the 
study with a detailed plan on defining the problem, selecting the 
members of the panel, defining panel size and conducting the Delphi 
rounds. The issue of SSC and SCC are two critical aspects to academi-
cians, industry practitioners and decision-makers. Empirical evidence 
suggests the relative scarcity of research in approaching the SSC and SCC 
drivers combinedly. 


Problem definition with required objective and scope is mentioned to 
ensure the right investigation of the problem with methodological 
appropriateness to arrive at intended outcomes. Drivers of SSC and SCC 
are explored from literature review. Applicability of the same for Indian 
earthmoving and mining equipment manufacturing industry is required 
to be ensured. In order to capture greater insights on the problem, the 
panel members (industry experts, academicians, and government rep-
resentatives with more than 15 years of work experience in the areas of 
sustainability, supply chain operations, corporate strategy, health- 
safety-environment) were selected from three broad areas, as follows: 
1) Earthmoving and mining industry, Indian or multinational firms with 
presence of manufacturing plant in India and operating in India for more 
than a decade, 2) Academia, including academic institutions with a 
presence of more than 20 years in operation and offering programs on 
supply chain, sustainability and environment for at least 10 years in 
India (Indian Institute of Management, Indian Institute of Technology), 
and 3) Government agencies for policy, involving in policy deployment 
authorities (Ministry of heavy industries and public enterprises, 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion). 


As Delphi technique often involves several rounds of feedback col-
lections, it is critical to have the commitment from prospective panel 
members in participation for several rounds of questionnaires and 
feedback spanning over months. Therefore, the participating panellists 
need to remain motivated during the period to ensure a stability of 
response throughout the study. Guided by research work of Delbari et al. 
(2016) for full-service airlines using Delphi, our research applied two 
types of non-random sampling, firstly purposive sampling followed by 
snowball sampling. Okoli and Pawlowski (2004) suggested taking the 
number of experts between 10 and 18 in the Delphi method who may not 
be required to meet face-to-face. We contacted at least 10 experts each 
from earthmoving and mining equipment manufacturing industry, ac-
ademicians with subject matter expertise from premium Indian in-
stitutes, and government representatives responsible for driving and 
implementing initiatives. The Delphi method was conducted through 
two rounds of the questionnaire. We selected 36 experts with partici-
pation of 15, 12, and 9 experts from earthmoving and mining equipment 


Table 3 
Interpretive structural modeling (ISM) and its application in supply chain.  


Sr 
No. 


Researcher (Year) Issues covered Application Domain 


1 Kavilal et al. 
(2018) 


Finding out 
interdependence among 
SCC drivers; 


Automotive industry, 
India 


2 Lim et al. (2017) Driving and dependence 
power in SSCM within the 
context of knowledge 
management 


Textile industry, 
Vietnam 


3 Jia et al (2015) Identifying the dominant 
SSCM practices for 
adoption of the same 


Mining and mineral 
industry, India 


4 Ghadimi et al. 
(2019) 


Literature review on SSC 
modeling and analysis 


Multiple industry 


5 Ali et al. (2017) Barriers of reverse logistics 
in computer supply chain 


Computer, Bangladesh 


6 Dubey et al. 
(2017) 


To analyze complex 
relationship among JIT, 
lean practices and TQM 


Manufacturing 
industries 


7 Govindan et al. 
(2013) 


Influence of lean, green 
and resilient practices on 
supply chain performance 


Automotive industry 


8 Luthra et al. 
(2017) 


Developing framework for 
sustainable supplier 
selection 


An automobile 
company, India 


9 Majumdar and 
Sinha (2018) 


Analysing the barrier of 
green textile supply chain 
management 


Textile industry, South- 
east Asia 


10 Malviya and Kant 
(2017) 


To develop the relationship 
among green supply chain 
management enablers and 
to understand mutual 
influences 


Indian automobile 
industry 


11 Poduval et al. 
(2015) 


Analysing the barriers in 
implementing total 
productive maintenance 
(TPM) 


Companies which 
implemented TPM 


12 Raut et al. (2017) To establish mutual 
relationship among critical 
success factor for 
implementation of SSCM 


Oil and gas sector, 
India 


13 Thirupathi and 
Vinodh (2016) 


Application of sustainable 
manufacturing factors 


Indian automobile 
component sector 


14 Vasanthakumar 
et al. (2016) 


Analysis of factors 
influencing lean 
remanufacturing practices 


Indian automotive 
component 
remanufacturing 
organisations 


15 Venkatesh et al. 
(2015) 


Devised risk prioritization 
model for supply chain 
risks 


Apparel industry, India 


16 Yadav and Barve 
(2015) 


Analysis of critical success 
factors of humanitarian 
supply chain 


Humanitarian supply 
chain, India  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  














Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


8


manufacturing industry, academia and government respectively. In the 
first round, we approached to 36 experts through semi-structured fac-
e-to-face interviews. We discussed the SSC drivers and SCC drivers for 
construction, earthmoving and mining machinery industry. The re-
sponses received from the panelists were reviewed. All the identified 
SSC and SCC drivers, derived from round 1 response and parallel liter-
ature review, were captured in forming the questionnaire for next round. 
The ideas and opinions presented in the first round were converged 
applying systematic content analysis (Neuman, 2011). The second round 
of questionnaire was structured based on the received responses of the 
first round. In round 2, panelists were requested to find out the level of 


importance of SSC and SCC drivers constructed on the five-point Likert 
scale ranging 1 to 5 (1 being not important to 5 being extremely 
important), to arrive at a consent on critical SSC and SCC drivers. Coding 
and indexing were used for analyzing the data of round 1, followed by 
examining the responses of round 2 applying the Content Validity Ratio 
(CVR). 


3.2. Introduction to ISM methodology 


ISM was developed in 1974 by John N. Warfield. Researchers are 
increasingly applying ISM methodology to characterize the mutual 


Fig. 1. Proposed research framework.  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


9


relationships among factors connecting to the issue (Attri et al., 2013). 
ISM is an interactive learning technique in which a set of related ele-
ments are organized into a comprehensive systematic model (Warfield, 
1974; Sage, 1977). The interpretation in establishing the relationship 
among elements of a system are based on the organized and consistent 
thinking of a group of experts and therefore, this methodology is defined 
as ‘interpretive’. It is a well-established modeling technique applied to 
analyze and identify interrelationships among the specific ele-
ments/variables of a system, which define the complex problem (War-
field, 1974). The influence of one variable on the other variables within 
the given system is analyzed in ISM by evaluating the individual driving 
and dependence power of respective variables. ISM methodology is 
structured with two important concepts, transitivity and reachability. 
Conceptual consistency is defined using transitivity, whereas reach-
ability concept acts as a building block of ISM methodology (Malviya 
and Kant, 2017). Application of transitivity consents to use inferential 
opinion to fill the cells of the reachability matrix (Watson, 1973). 


The complex problem of finding mutual relationships among SCC 
and SCC drivers is investigated by ISM. The relative importance of SSC 
and SCC drivers concerning supply chain strategy was established con-
structed on driving and dependence power. Steps involved in the ISM 
technique are as follows (Kannan et al., 2009): 


Step 1: Identification of SSC drivers and SCC drivers relevant to In-
dian earthmoving and mining machinery industry by literature re-
view and group problem-solving Delphi method. 
Step 2: Examining the contextual relationship between selected 
drivers for pairwise comparison and establishing the relationship 
among the concerning pairs of drivers at a time 
Step 3: Preparing a structural self–interaction matrix (SSIM) based 
on pairwise comparison of drivers. 
Step 4: Developing an initial reachability matrix from the SSIM and 
examining the matrix for transitivity. This transitivity is developed 
based on the assumption of ISM technique. It proposes that if a driver 
‘X’ is related to ‘Y’ and ‘Y’ is related to ‘Z’, then ‘X’ is related to ‘Z’. 
Step 5: Partitioning of the obtained reachability matrix and arran-
ging the drivers into their different levels. 
Step 6: Creating a directed graph to represent the relationships ob-
tained from reachability matrix. 
Step 7: Creating an ISM-based model by converting the resultant 
digraph, by replacing driver nodes with the statements; and 
Step 8: Checking the conceptual inconsistency of the model and 
incorporating the required changes. 


For ISM, we approached the same identified experts participated in 
the Delphi technique with the final list of SSC and SCC drivers obtained 
after round 2 of Delphi. The mutual relationship among the identified 
SSC and SCC drivers are modelled through brain-storming technique. 
The inter-relationship between any pair two drivers are investigated 
with “Yes” and “No” questions (Dubey et al., 2017). For n identified SSC 
and SCC drivers, the total number of paired comparisons will be nC2. 
The questionnaire was sent to the same 36 participants who responded 
in Delphi. We could able to receive the response from only 32 experts 
resulting in a response rate of 88.9%. 


4. Results and findings 


4.1. Finding from the Delphi method 


During the first round of the Delphi, we approached 42 experts to 
check their availability for interview participation. But only 36 con-
tacted experts (15, 12, and 9 experts from earthmoving and mining 
equipment manufacturing industry, academia and government respec-
tively) confirmed to participate in semi-structured face-to-face in-
terviews. We apprised all the participated panel experts about the 
objective of this research and detailed them about drivers of both 


sustainable supply chain and supply chain complexity. The panelists 
were also updated about the earthmoving, construction and mining 
machinery industry, its participants, business outlook, future trends 
based on the available reports from industry journals, corporate bodies, 
government concerned departments, company webpages and special 
issues on industry-specific exhibitions in the operating sector. The 
duration of the conducted interview is kept as 30 min on average. The 
discussion points during the interview were covered through notes and 
audio-recording to ensure capturing of opinions and feedbacks. Based on 
the interview, opinions shared by the panelists were converted to 
meaningful information about our research using coding and indexing. 
The obtained information on drivers of SSC and SCC from experts is then 
compared with the available drivers in the existing literature. The results 
of round 1 suggested that a new set of drivers of SSC and SCC were 
identified by the experts besides confirmation of the identified drivers 
through literature. Three new SSC drivers (organisational culture, 
organisational characteristics and organisational resources) and six new 
SCC drivers (supplier’s regional strategies, numbers of layers of sup-
pliers for focal firm, level of service expectation, spatial positioning of 
customers, focus on mass-customisation and technological disruption) 
were identified. Frequency of interviewees reporting the new SSC and 
SCC drivers are mentioned in Tables 4 and 6. Tables 5 and 7 summarizes 
the definitions of these newly identified drivers respectively. 


The identified drivers of SSC and SCC a) by the panel experts in first 
round, and b) mentioned in the literature (Table 1 and 2) were included 
in a questionnaire for round 2. In second round, we requested experts to 
evaluate the level of importance of SSC and SCC drivers on the five-point 
Likert scale ranging 1 to 5 (1 ¼ not important to 5 ¼ extremely impor-
tant), to reach at an agreement in selecting key drivers of SSC and SCC 
respectively. Drivers, which attained a CVR of at least 0.31 (number of 
responded experts was 36; Lawshe, 1975) were finally selected as the 
responsible drivers of SSC and SCC for this research context. The 
following formula was applied in calculating CVR for each driver. 


Content Validity RatioðCVRÞ¼ ne % N=2
N=2  


where ne is the number of experts in the panel indicating “essential” and 
N is the total number of panelists. Lawshe (1975) categorized three 
options for every response which includes ‘essential’, ‘useful but not 
essential’, and ‘not necessary’. As all the received responses were scaled 
in the five-point Likert scale, the two scales were comparatively 
matched. Consequently, ‘extremely important (¼5)’ and ‘very important 
(¼4)’ of Likert scale were matched equal to ‘essential’ option, ‘moder-
ately important (¼3)’ considered as equal to ‘useful but not essential’ 
option, and ‘slightly important(¼2)’ and ‘not important (¼1)’ were 
equated to ‘not necessary’ option of Lawshe (Delbari et al., 2016). 


Based on the round 2 responses, drivers of SSC and SCC with cor-
responding CVR value and acceptance/rejection status were shown in 
Table 8 and Table 9. Drivers which obtained CVR higher 0.31 in round 2 
were accepted and others were rejected. Table 8 suggests that out of 8 
considered SSC drivers, only 4 is included for the next phase of data 
collection, whereas Table 9 indicates that only 8 SCC drivers are selected 
from the list of 16. 


From the outcome of the two-round Delphi technique, it is evident 
that institutional pressures, strategic supplier collaboration, market 
pressure, and corporate strategy are the four top-most SSC drivers for 
Indian mining and manufacturing context. Besides, 8 SCC drivers 
(number of suppliers, number and variety of customers, product life 
cycle, uncertainty in the market, competitive rivalry, forecast inaccu-
racy, spatial positioning of customers, New technologies/technological 
disruption) are identified. A total of 12 identified SSC drivers and SCC 
drivers are represented in Table 10 and ascribed with reference code for 
ISM. 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


10


4.2. Research finding from the ISM 


For ISM, we approached the same identified 36 experts participated 
in the Delphi technique with the final list of SSC and SCC drivers, as 
obtained after round 2 of Delphi. The mutual relationship among the 12 
identified SSC and SCC drivers (as referred in Table 10) are estimated by 
determining the contextual relationship between any pair of two drivers 
with “Yes” and “No” questions. For 12 identified SSC and SCC drivers, 
the total number of paired comparisons will be 66 (¼12C2). 


4.2.1. Developing the structural self-interaction matrix (SSIM) 
To develop SSIM for Table 10, symbols (V, A, X, O) were used to 


represent the contextual relationships between drivers i and j and 
illustrated in Table 11 (Darbari et al., 2017) (see Table 12). 


4.2.2. Developing reachability matrix 
The obtained SSIM is thereby transformed to a reachability matrix 


(Table 13) by replacing V, A, X and O with 1 and 0 as mentioned in 
Table 11. 


4.2.3. Transitivity principle 
We have applied the transitivity principle to fill some of the cells of 


the initial reachability matrix by inference. Transitivity can be illus-
trated as: if element ‘A’ relates to element ‘B’ and element ‘B’ relates to 
element ‘C’, then transitivity implies element ‘A’ relates to element ‘C’ 
(Sharma et al., 1995). Transitivity provides conceptual consistency in 
ISM and helps in removing the gaps between drivers. In Table 13, some 
cells with ‘‘000 values are replaced with ‘‘100 applying transitivity rule. The 
replacing value is represented by ‘‘*’’ besides the value 1. We arrive at 
final reachability matrix as obtained in Table 14 after applying transi-
tivity principle. 


4.2.4. Level partitioning 
The hierarchical structure of level partitioning is achieved by finding 


the reachability set and interaction set at each level (Khalid et al., 2016). 
This process is continued till the assigning of each element is completed. 
The outcome of the level partitioning process resulted in 7 levels for 
considered drivers and shown in Table 15. The entire process of level 
partitioning is illustrated in Appendix A1 (Table A1 to Table A7). 


4.2.5. Developing digraph 
Based on the final reachability matrix (Table 14) and level parti-


tioning (Table 15), a directed graph with a hierarchical level of drivers 
(or nodes) connected with lines is developed to denote the structural 
model. The nature of the relationship between any two drivers ‘i’ and ‘j’ 


Table: 4 
New sustainable supply chain drivers as identified by Delphi panel members.    


Frequency of responses  


Sr No. New Drivers Industry experts (n ¼ 15) Academicians (n ¼ 12) Government representatives (n ¼ 9) Total 


1 Organisational culture 7 4 3 14 
2 Organisational characteristics 5 6 5 16 
3 Organisational resources and focus 3 2 1 6  


Table: 5 
The definitions of new sustainable supply chain drivers (SSC) identified by 
Delphi panel members.  


Serial 
No. 


Sustainable 
supply chain 
drivers 


Category Description Literature 
reference 


1 Organisational 
culture 


Sustainability Organization’s 
preference towards 
accepting 
sustainable practices 
through health and 
safety of its 
employees, 
willingness to 
improve 
sustainability 
performance, 
applying sustainable 
tools drive supply 
chain to adopt 
sustainability 
practices. 


Hsu et al. 
(2013),  
Govindan 
et al. 
(2016),  
Alzawawi 
(2014),  
Paulraj et al. 
(2015) 


2 Organisational 
characteristics 


Sustainability Firm’s operating 
sector and category 
of industry, its 
positioning in the 
supply chain 
network, 
geographical 
location of 
functioning, degree 
of 
internationalisation 
collaboratively 
influences the firm’s 
supply chain. 


Tate et al. 
(2010),  
Ayuso et al. 
(2013) 


3 Organisational 
resources and 
focus 


Sustainability Organisations are 
increasingly 
developing 
resources and 
focussing on 
implementation by 
adoption of 
sustainable supply 
chain tools and 
techniques (i.e. 
logistics 
optimization, green 
product design, 
green warehousing, 
training and 
development, 
continuous 
improvement etc) 


Schrettle 
et al. 
(2014),  
Havercamp 
et al. 
(2010),  
Giunipero 
et al. 
(2012),  
Dubey et al 
(2017)  


Table: 6 
New supply chain complexity (SCC) drivers identified by Delphi panel members.   


Sr 
No. 


New Drivers Frequency of responses  


Industry 
experts 
(n ¼ 15) 


Academicians 
(n ¼ 12) 


Government 
representatives 
(n ¼ 9) 


Total 


1 Supplier’s 
regional 
strategies 


1 1 0 2 


2 Numbers of 
layers/tiers 


2 1 2 5 


3 Level of service 
expectation 


2 0 1 3 


4 Spatial 
positioning of 
Customers 


3 3 0 6 


5 Mass- 
customisation 


1 3 1 5 


6 New 
Technologies/ 
Technological 
disruption 


6 4 5 15  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


11


is represented by the type of line used. If driver ‘i’ leads to driver ‘j’, a 
unidirectional line starting from ‘i’ is directed to driver ‘j’. If a driver ‘i’ 
and driver ‘j’ leads to each other, a bidirectional line is applied to denote 
the mutual relationship. ISM model involving 12 identified SSC and SCC 


Table: 7 
The definitions of new supply chain complexity (SCC) drivers identified by 
Delphi panel members.  


Serial 
No. 


SCC drivers Category Description Literature 
reference 


1 Regional 
strategies of 
suppliers 


Upstream Different region- 
specific strategy 
followed by 
suppliers and focal 
firm cause 
complexity in 
business and supply 
chain alignment. 


Chand et al. 
(2018) 


2 Numbers of 
layers of 
suppliers 


Upstream It is referred as SCC 
caused due to 
number of layers of 
suppliers 


Bode and 
Wagner 
(2015);  
Chand et al. 
(2018) 


3 Level of service 
expectation 


Downstream To meet customer’s 
growing 
expectation on 
product and 
service, robust 
network for spare 
part and service 
supply chain is 
required; 


Chand et al. 
(2018) 


4 Spatial 
positioning of 
Customers 


Downstream Dynamic market 
condition, firms’ 
adaptability to 
meet customer 
expectation on 
quality 
requirements 
complying to 
specific regional 
acceptance 
standards, 
reduction in 
customer delivery 
lead time spread at 
different 
geographical 
location are drivers 
responsible for 
complexity in 
supply chain 
operations. 


Geodis 
(2017),  
Chand et al. 
(2018) 


5 Mass- 
customisation 


Downstream Customer’s 
insistence on 
products and 
services tailored to 
their specific 
requirement 
increases SCC in 
inventory 
management with a 
greater number of 
parts to be 
developed and 
handled. 


da Silviera 
(2005) 


6 New 
Technologies/ 
Technological 
disruption 


External Advent of digital 
supply chain, 
adoption of new 
technologies, rapid 
pace of 
technological 
innovation pose 
challenge on 
conventional 
supply chain 
practices and 
expose them to the 
vulnerability of 
disruption. 


Kavilal et al. 
(2017)  


Table 8 
Results of acceptance or rejection of sustainable supply chain drivers.  


Sr. 
no. 


Sustainable supply chain drivers ne CVR Result 


1 Institutional pressures (Laws and regulations 
imposed by government, regional or 
international regulations) 


33 0.83 Accepted 


2 Societal pressures (Social values and ethics) 23 0.28 Rejected 
3 Strategic supplier collaboration 29 0.61 Accepted 
4 Market pressure 26 0.44 Accepted 
5 Corporate strategy 31 0.72 Accepted 
6 Organisational culture 22 0.22 Rejected 
7 Organisational characteristics 19 0.06 Rejected 
8 Organisational resources and focus 15 %0.17 Rejected  


Table 9 
Results of acceptance or rejection of supply chain complexity drivers.  


Sr. 
no. 


Supply chain complexity drivers ne CVR Result 


1 Number of suppliers (Horizontal Complexity) 32 0.78 Accepted 
2 Spatial Positioning of suppliers 22 0.22 Rejected 
3 Number and variety of customers 28 0.56 Accepted 
4 Product Life Cycle 27 0.50 Accepted 
5 Uncertainty in the market 33 0.83 Accepted 
6 Laws and regulations imposed by the 


government 
22 0.22 Rejected 


7 Competitive rivalry 31 0.72 Accepted 
8 Forecast Inaccuracy 29 0.61 Accepted 
9 Number of products 20 0.11 Rejected 
10 Number of processes 21 0.17 Rejected 
11 Supplier’s regional strategies 19 0.06 Rejected 
12 Numbers of layers/tiers of suppliers 22 0.22 Rejected 
13 Level of service expectation 21 0.17 Rejected 
14 Spatial positioning of Customers 28 0.56 Accepted 
15 Mass-customisation 23 0.28 Rejected 
16 New Technologies/Technological disruption 34 0.89 Accepted  


Table: 10 
List of SSC and SCC drivers with corresponding reference code.  


Serial 
No. 


SSC/SCC drivers SSC/SCC drivers reference 
code 


1 Number and variety of customers D1 
2 Product Life Cycle D2 
3 Spatial positioning of Customers D3 
4 Uncertainty in the market E1 
5 New Technologies/Technological 


disruption 
E2 


6 Competitive rivalry E3 
7 Forecast Inaccuracy O1 
8 Institutional pressures (Laws and 


regulations) 
S1 


9 Strategic supplier collaboration S2 
10 Market pressure S3 
11 Corporate Strategy S4 
12 Number of suppliers (Horizontal 


Complexity) 
U1  


Table: 11  
Representative symbols i → j j → i (i,j) th entry (j,i) th entry 


V ✓ ⨯ 1 0 
A ⨯ ✓ 0 1 
X ✓ ✓ 1 1 
O ⨯ ⨯ 0 0  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


12


drivers is shown in Fig. 2. 


4.2.6. MICMAC analysis 
MICMAC analysis Matrice d’ Impacts croises multiplication appliqu!e 


and classment (cross-impact matrix multiplication applied to classifi-
cation) is abbreviated as MICMAC. MICMAC analysis is conducted to 
analyze the driving power and dependence power of SSC and SCC 
drivers. Dependence power and driving power is plotted against X and Y 
axis, respectively. Based on the driving power and dependence power 
(ref: Table 16), the drivers have been classified into four categories: 
autonomous, driving, linkage and dependent as presented in Fig. 3. 


4.2.6.1. Findings from MICMAC analysis. 


Cluster 1: Autonomous SSC and SCC drivers- These drivers exhibit 
weak drive power and weak dependence power. Product Life Cycle 
(D2), competitive rivalry (E3) and corporate strategy (S4) are posi-
tioned in this cluster. 


Table: 12 
Structural self-interaction matrix (SSIM).   


U1 S4 S3 S2 S1 O1 E3 E2 E1 D3 D2 D1 


D1 V O O O O A A A O A O  
D2 V O O O O V O O O O   
D3 V O A A A X A A O    
E1 V V V O V V V O     
E2 V O X A A V O      
E3 O O O O A O       
O1 V A A A A        
S1 V V O O         
S2 V O V          
S3 V V           
S4 V            
U1              


Table 13 
Initial reachability matrix.   


D1 D2 D3 E1 E2 E3 O1 S1 S2 S3 S4 U1 Driving Power 


D1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 
D2 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 3 
D3 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 4 
E1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 7 
E2 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 6 
E3 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 
O1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 4 
S1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 7 
S2 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 6 
S3 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 6 
S4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 3 
U1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 
Dep Power 5 1 7 1 4 3 9 2 1 4 4 11   


Table 14 
Final reachability matrix.   


D1 D2 D3 E1 E2 E3 O1 S1 S2 S3 S4 U1 Driver Power 


D1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 
D2 1* 1 1* 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 5 
D3 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 4 
E1 1* 0 1* 1 1* 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 10 
E2 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1* 1 7 
E3 1 0 1 0 0 1 1* 0 0 0 0 1* 5 
O1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 4 
S1 1* 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1* 1 1 9 
S2 1* 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1* 1 8 
S3 1* 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 7 
S4 1* 0 1* 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 5 
U1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 
Dependency Power 11 1 10 1 5 3 10 2 1 5 6 12   


Table 15  
SCC/SSC 
drivers 
reference 
number 


Corresponding 
serial number 


Reachability Intersection 
set 


Level 


D1 1 1,12 1 2 
D2 2 1,2,3,7,12 2 4 
D3 3 1,3,7,12 3,7 3 
E1 4 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,12 4 7 
E2 5 1,3,5,7,10,11,12 5,10 5 
E3 6 1,3,6,7,12 6 4 
O1 7 1,3,7,12 3,7 3 
S1 8 1,3,5,6,7,8,10,11,12 8 6 
S2 9 1,3,5,7,9,10,11,12 9 6 
S3 10 1,3,5,7,10,11,12 5,10 5 
S4 11 1,3,7,11,12 11 4 
U1 12 12 12 1  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


13


Cluster 2: Dependence SSC and SCC drivers- These drivers are 
characterised with strong dependence power and weak drive power. 
Number and variety of customers (D1), spatial positioning of cus-
tomers (D3), number of suppliers (U1) and Forecast inaccuracy (O1) 
are within this cluster.  


Cluster 3: Linkage SSC and SCC drivers- We do not find any driver 
falling in this cluster.  


Cluster 4: Driving SSC and SCC drivers- These drivers have strong 
drive power but weak dependence power. We have five drivers, i.e., 
institutional pressures (S1), strategic supplier collaboration (S2), 
market pressure (S3), uncertainty in the market (E1), new technol-
ogies (E2) in this cluster.   


5. Discussion and managerial implication 


Fig. 2. ISM model.  


Table 16 
Position coordinates of identified SSC and SCC drivers.  


Drivers Dependency Power (X) Driving Power (Y) 


D1 11 2 
D2 1 5 
D3 10 4 
E1 1 10 
E2 5 7 
E3 3 5 
O1 10 4 
S1 2 9 
S2 1 8 
S3 5 7 
S4 6 5 
U1 12 1  


Fig. 3. Plotting of position coordinates of identified SSC and SCC drivers.  


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


14


Knowing the interrelationship among SSC and SCC drivers will 
enable the supply chain managers in well-aligned sustainable supply 
chain planning. This study has been conducted in mining and earth-
moving machinery manufacturing firms operating in India to analyze 
the industry dynamics of construction equipment, material handling, 
and off-road vehicle manufacturing industries. Limited availability of 
literature in analyzing interactions among SCC drivers with SSC drivers 
and its impact on overall supply chain management is addressed in this 
study. This research attempts to bridge the gap between studies 
exploring SSC and SCC drivers independently. Our research established 
seven-levelled model involving twelve identified critical drivers 
combining SSC and SCC. Based on driving and dependence power 
derived in ISM and MICMAC analysis, the relative importance is struc-
tured. Following critical managerial insights can be inferred to frame 
policy recommendations:  


a) It is evident (ref: Fig. 3, MICMAC analysis), that uncertainty in the 
market (E1), institutional pressures (S1), strategic supplier collabo-
ration (S2), market pressure (S3), new technologies (E2) are key 
drivers which require urgent attention from decision-makers. Un-
certainty in the market influentially drives sustainable drivers like 
institutional pressures (S1), strategic supplier collaboration (S2), 
market pressure (S3). Uncertainty in the market is caused due to the 
multiplicity of factors like globalised economic risk, geo-political 
events, cyclicity of markets. To highlight the criticality of market 
uncertainty, Managing Director of automobile sector of DHL once 
commented “Global economy has demonstrated one clear fact: with 
complexity comes uncertainty; uncertainty in global supply chain 
cause traditional supply chain models to break down” (CIPS, 2014). 
To corroborate the fact with case, Indian construction machinery 
industry experienced significant supply chain uncertainty due to 
disruptive increase in tax rates from 18% to 28% by the imple-
mentation of Goods and Services Tax (GST). This resulted in signif-
icant demand slowdown with excess inventory (Chand et al., 2018). 
The mining and earth-moving machinery industry experienced 
degrowth in the financial year 2017 as the impact of the same. The 
industry underwent similar uncertain time in March’ 2017 due to 
sudden change in legislation by Indian apex court asking the industry 
to comply with BS-IV vehicle emission norms. This temporarily dis-
rupted the supply chain operations in manufacturing plants and 
entire supply chain network for the sector in general.  


b) SSC drivers like institutional pressures (S1), strategic supplier 
collaboration (S2), market pressure (S3) with relatively higher 
driving power (ref: Table 16) have major impact in forming the 
overall structure of ISM digraph. This emphasizes the fact that supply 
chain managers should focus on said drivers to control the supply 
chain performance. Geodis (2017) survey on companies with 
worldwide supply chain presence, argued that specific local regula-
tions and the varying levels of maturity exhibited by suppliers have 
resulted in increased operational complexities. Institutional pressure 
and obligations are often driven by societal, environmental and 
economic needs as highlighted in sustainable development model 
mentioned in TBL.  


c) Our research finding highlights the importance of strategic supplier 
collaboration (S2) in controlling critical sustainable drivers like 
institutional pressure (S1), market pressure (S3), new technologies 
(E2), corporate strategy (S4). This strengthens the research finding of 
Kumar et al. (2016), who proves buyer-supplier relationship as a 
crucial factor in implementing sustainable supply chain for the In-
dian automobile sector. In a research, jointly conducted by Michigan 
State University’s Eli Broad College of Business and APICS Supply 
Chain Council titled “Supply Chain Management: Beyond the Hori-
zon, MANAGING THE COMPLEXITY PARADIGM (2017)”, inter-
viewed more than fifty firms around the world. The research 
outcome suggested that institutional regulation and supplier 
collaboration are important drivers in managing complexity. One of 


the leading Indian industrial group, as a part of the sustainable 
journey, has developed programs to share knowledge with suppliers 
and to enable them in equipping responsibly sustainable partners 
(United Nation Global Compact Office and Business for Social Re-
sponsibility, 2010).  


d) The outcome of this study suggests that adoption of new technologies 
(E2) plays important role in implementing sustainable supply chain. 
It influences drivers such as competitive rivalry (E3) and shapes 
corporate strategy (S4) of a focal firm. Increasing awareness among 
customers for sustainable, environmentally acceptable and smart 
products is motivating the manufacturers to develop and innovate 
products and solutions built with intelligent features. JCB, leading 
construction equipment (CE) manufacturer, is using 
internet-of-things (IoT) and big data using telematics technology to 
improve the product performance and customer experience. Another 
Indian CE manufacturer has incorporated the adoption of newer 
technologies in the firm’s vision statement to enhance the customer 
experience. In a research report by Gartner (2019) titled ‘The Future 
of Supply Chain Operations’, vice president analyst of Gartner 
emphasized on adoption of ‘new business models and technologies to 
excel in an increasingly complex and volatile world’ and suggested 
supply chain leaders ‘to innovate and invest in new processes and 
technologies to help their companies remain relevant in their mar-
kets’. This statement underscores the importance of new technolo-
gies as a key driver towards the firm’s SC strategy and corroborates 
our research finding. 


5. Conclusion and future scope 


This research work is endeavored to build a novel theoretical 
framework by integrating the SSC and SCC drivers in a complex dynamic 
business scenario. The study, aimed at investigating the interactions 
among drivers of SSC and SCC simultaneously, enables in developing an 
effective supply chain strategy. Developed interrelationship models 
among SSC and SCC drivers will enable supply chain managers in 
adopting a unified approach for informed decision-making. This work is 
aimed to open-up further research for studying the impact of combined 
drivers of SSC and SCC on various areas of the supply chain like SC 
agility, SC strategy, SC responsiveness, SC performance. This research 
framework can act as a guide in building theory about the impact of the 
mutual relationship among SSC and SCC drivers on a firm’s financial, 
operational, sustainable performance. 


The supply chain managers are increasingly emphasizing on sus-
tainable supply chain and supply chain complexity for enhancing the 
overall supply chain performance. Often researchers conducted the 
study of SSC and SCC independently by exploring respective drivers. Our 
research outcome will bring a new dimension to approach the subject 
with an integrated outlook. This study enriches the existing literature 
with its critical contribution in signifying sustainable drivers corrobo-
rated by practical insights from industry experts. 


This study has been conducted in mining and earthmoving machin-
ery manufacturing firms operating in India. The research framework of 
this paper can be extended to analyze construction equipment, material 
handling, and off-road vehicle manufacturing industries due to similar 
sectoral dynamics. In the future, research may also be extended to other 
manufacturing sectors applying a different set of identified drivers. 
Research can also be applied in other countries to construct a more 
generic model. 


The hybrid decision-making two-phased research methodology is 
adopted in this research. The Delphi technique followed by interpretive 
structural modeling (ISM) was applied to determine the mutual rela-
tionship among important 12 identified drivers based on the study. The 
mentioned methodology provides flexibility to structure research 
problems integrating rich industry-academia outlook with a different set 
of drivers. There can be drivers, not included in this study, that may 
affect the research findings. In the future, the research outcomes of this 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  






Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


15


paper can be validated by applying a different set of MCDM tools. In 
future authors intend to integrate ISM with structural equation modeling 
(SEM) for statistical validation of result. 


Declaration of competing interest 


No conflict of interest for the following paper. 


CRediT authorship contribution statement 


Pushpendu Chand: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & 
editing, Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis. Jitesh J. 
Thakkar: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Concep-
tualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing - orig-
inal draft, Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization, Methodology, 
Formal analysis, Supervision.  


Appendix A. Supplementary data 


Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726. 


Appendix A 


Level partitioning intermediate steps 


Table A1 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 1.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection set Level 


D1 1 1,12 1  
D2 2 1,2,3,7,12 2  
D3 3 1,3,7,12 3,7  
E1 4 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,12 4  
E2 5 1,3,5,7,10,11,12 5,10  
E3 6 1,3,6,7,12 6  
O1 7 1,3,7,12 3,7  
S1 8 1,3,5,6,7,8,10,11,12 8  
S2 9 1,3,5,7,9,10,11,12 9  
S3 10 1,3,5,7,10,11,12 5,10  
S4 11 1,3,7,11,12 11  
U1 12 12 12 1   


Table A2 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 2.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection set Level 


D1 1 1, 1 2 
D2 2 1,2,3,7 2  
D3 3 1,3,7 3,7  
E1 4 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11 4  
E2 5 1,3,5,7,10,11 5,10  
E3 6 1,3,6,7 6  
O1 7 1,3,7 3,7  
S1 8 1,3,5,6,7,8,10,11 8  
S2 9 1,3,5,7,9,10,11 9  
S3 10 1,3,5,7,10,11 5,10  
S4 11 1,3,7,11 11    


Table A3 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 3.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection set Level 


D2 2 2,3,7 2  
D3 3 3,7 3,7 3 
E1 4 3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11 4  
E2 5 3,5,7,10,11 5,10  
E3 6 3,6,7 6  
O1 7 3,7 3,7 3 
S1 8 3,5,6,7,8,10,11 8  
S2 9 3,5,7,9,10,11 9  
S3 10 3,5,7,10,11 5,10  
S4 11 3,7,11 11    


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101726




Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


16


Table A4 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 4.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection Set Level 


D2 2 2 2 4 
E1 4 4,5,6,8,10,11 4  
E2 5 5,10,11 5,10  
E3 6 6 6 4 
S1 8 5,6,8,10,11 8  
S2 9 5,9,10,11 9  
S3 10 5,10,11 5,10  
S4 11 11 11 4   


Table A5 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 5.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection Set Level 


E1 4 4,5,8,10 4  
E2 5 5,10 5,10 5 
S1 8 5,8,10 8  
S2 9 5,9,10 9  
S3 10 5,10 5,10 5   


Table A6 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 6.  


SCC/SSC drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection Set Level 


E1 4 4,8 4  
S1 8 8 8 6 
S2 9 9 9 6   


Table A7 
Intersection of reachability and antecedent sets and representation of level group 7.  


Supply chain complexity drivers reference number Corresponding serial number Reachability Intersection Set Level 


E1 4 4 4 7  


References 


Ageron, B., Gunasekaran, A., Spalanzani, A., 2012. Sustainable supply management: an 
empirical study. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (1), 168–182. 


Ahi, P., Searcy, C., 2015. An analysis of metrics used to measure performance in green 
and sustainable supply chains. J. Clean. Prod. 86, 360–377. 


Aitken, J., Bozarth, C., Garn, W., 2016. To eliminate or absorb supply chain complexity: a 
conceptual model and case study. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 21 (6), 759–774. 


Alblas, A.A., Kristian, Peters, K., Hans, Wortmann, J.C., 2014. Fuzzy sustainability 
incentives in new product development. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 34 (4), 513–545. 


Ali, S.M., Arafin, A., Moktadir, M.A., Rahman, T., Zahan, N., 2017. Barriers to reverse 
logistics in the computer supply chain using interpretive structural model. Global J. 
Flex. Syst. Manag. 19 (S1), 53–68. 


Alzawawi, M., 2014. Drivers and obstacles for creating sustainable supply chain 
management and operations. In: 2014 Zone I Student Papers Proceedings Archive. 
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), Washington, DC, USA, pp. 1–8, 
2014.  


Asefeso, A., 2015. Sustainable Urban Supply Chain Management. AA Global Sourcing 
Ltd. 


Ashby, A., Leat, M., Hudson-Smith, M., 2012. Making connections: a review of supply 
chain management and sustainability literature. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 17 (5), 
497–516. 


Attri, R., Dev, N., Sharma, V., 2013. Interpretive structural modeling (ISM) approach: an 
overview. Res. J. Manag. Sci. 2 (2), 3–8. 


Ayuso, S., Roca, M., Colom!e, R., 2013. SMEs as “transmitters” of CSR requirements in the 
supply chain. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 18 (5), 497–508. 


Bai, C., Sarkis, J., 2018. Honoring complexity in sustainable supply chain research: a 
rough set theoretic approach (SI:ResMeth). Prod. Plann. Contr. 29 (16), 1367–1384. 


Bode, C., Wagner, S.M., 2015. Structural drivers of upstream supply chain complexity 
and the frequency of supply chain disruptions. J. Oper. Manag. 36, 215–228. 


Bozarth, C.C., Warsing, D.P., Flynn, B.B., Flynn, E.J., 2009. The impact of supply chain 
complexity on manufacturing plant performance. J. Oper. Manag. 78–93. 


BSI, Business Continuity Institute, 2015. Supply chain complexity top business continuity 
concern for manufacturing industry. report. https://www.bsigroup.com/en-AE/Abo 
ut-BSI/Media-Center/Press-releases/2015/march/Supply-chain-complexity-top-b 
usiness-continuity-concern-for-manufacturing-industry. 


Carter, C.R., Rogers, D.S., 2008. A framework of sustainable supply chain management: 
moving toward new theory. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38 (5), 360–387. 


Chand, P., Thakkar, J.J., Ghosh, K.K., 2018. Analysis of supply chain complexity drivers 
for Indian mining equipment manufacturing companies combining SAP-LAP and 
AHP. Resour. Pol. 59, 389–410. 


Chen, L., Zhao, X., Tang, O., Price, L., Zhang, S., Zhu, W., 2017. Supply chain 
collaboration for sustainability: a literature review and future research agenda. Int. 
J. Prod. Econ. 194, 73–87. 


Choi, T., Krause, D.R., 2006. The supply base and its complexity: implications for 
transaction costs, risks, responsiveness, and innovation. J. Oper. Manag. 24 (5), 
637–652. 


CIPS-Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply, 2014. Supply chains: with 
complexity comes uncertainty. https://www.cips.org/supply-management/opinion/ 
2014/november/supply-chains-with-complexity-comes-uncertainty. 


da Silveira, G.J.C., 2005. Market priorities, manufacturing configuration, and business 
performance: an empirical analysis of the order- winners framework. J. Oper. 
Manag. 23 (6), 662–675. 


Dangelico, R.M., Pujari, D., 2010. Mainstreaming green product innovation: why and 
How companies integrate environmental sustainability. J. Bus. Ethics 95 (3), 
471–486. 


Darbari, J.D., Agarwal, V., Sharma, R., Jha, P.C., 2017. Analysis of impediments to 
sustainability in the food supply chain: an interpretive structural modeling approach. 
Springer Proc. Business Eco. 57–68. 


Delbari, S.A., Ng, S.I., Aziz, Y.A., Ho, J.A., 2016. An investigation of key competitiveness 
indicators and drivers of full-service airlines using Delphi and AHP techniques. J. Air 
Transport. Manag. 52, 23–34. 


Denyer, D., Tranfield, D., 2009. Producing a systematic review. In: Buchanan, D.A., 
Bryman, A. (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods. Sage 
Publications Ltd, pp. 671–689. 


Department of Heavy Industries (DHI), 2016-17. Annual Report. Ministry of heavy 
industries and public enterprises. http://www.dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFil 
e/dhi.pdf. 


Dey, A., LaGuardia, P., Srinivasan, M., 2011. Building sustainability in logistics 
operations: a research agenda. Manage. Res. Rev. 34 (11), 1237–1259. 


DHL, BUILDING The World, 2015. A DHL perspective on future engineering & 
manufacturing supply chains. https://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/l 
ogistics/white_papers/DHL_EandM_2015%2B_Building_The_World.pdf. 


Diabat, A., Kannan, D., Mathiyazhagan, K., 2014. Analysis of enablers for 
implementation of sustainable supply chain management – a textile case. J. Clean. 
Prod. 83, 391–403. 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref13

https://www.bsigroup.com/en-AE/About-BSI/Media-Center/Press-releases/2015/march/Supply-chain-complexity-top-business-continuity-concern-for-manufacturing-industry

https://www.bsigroup.com/en-AE/About-BSI/Media-Center/Press-releases/2015/march/Supply-chain-complexity-top-business-continuity-concern-for-manufacturing-industry

https://www.bsigroup.com/en-AE/About-BSI/Media-Center/Press-releases/2015/march/Supply-chain-complexity-top-business-continuity-concern-for-manufacturing-industry

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref18

https://www.cips.org/supply-management/opinion/2014/november/supply-chains-with-complexity-comes-uncertainty

https://www.cips.org/supply-management/opinion/2014/november/supply-chains-with-complexity-comes-uncertainty

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref23

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref24

http://www.dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/dhi.pdf

http://www.dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/dhi.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref27

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref27

https://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/logistics/white_papers/DHL_EandM_2015%2B_Building_The_World.pdf

https://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/logistics/white_papers/DHL_EandM_2015%2B_Building_The_World.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref29




Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


17


Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Childe, S.J., Shibin, K.T., Wamba, S.F., 
2017. Sustainable supply chain management: framework and further research 
directions. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 1119–1130. 


Fawcett, S.E., Fawcett, A.M., Watson, B.J., Magnan, G.M., 2012. Peeking inside the black 
box: toward an understanding of supply chain collaboration dynamics. J. Supply 
Chain Manag. 48 (1), 44–72. 


Fdi factsheet, D.I.P.P., February 2019. https://dipp.gov.in/sites/default/files/FDI_Factsh 
eet_12March2019.pdf. 


Flynn, B.B., Koufteros, X., Lu, G., 2016. On theory in supply chain uncertainty and its 
implications for supply chain integration. J. Supply Chain Manag. 52 (3), 3–27. 


Freeman, R.E., 2010. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK.  


Gartner Research, Nov, 2018. Predicts 2019: future of supply chain operations. https 
://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3894387/predicts-2019-future-of-supply-ch 
ain-operations. 


Geng, R., Mansouri, S.A., Aktas, E., 2017. The relationship between green supply chain 
management and performance: a meta-analysis of empirical evidences in Asian 
emerging economies. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 183, 245–258. 


Geodis, 2017. Supply chain worldwide survey. https://geodis.com/in/newsroom/press- 
releases/geodis-unveils-its-2017-supply-chain-worldwide-survey. 


Gerschberger, M., Hohensinn, R., 2013. Supply chain complexity - a view from different 
perspectives. accessed 24.04.15. https://www.pomsmeetings.org/confpapers/043/ 
043-0203.pdf. 


Ghadimi, P., Wang, C., Lim, M.K., 2019. Sustainable supply chain modeling and analysis: 
past debate, present problems and future challenges. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 140, 
72–84. 


Giannakis, M., Papadopoulos, T., 2016. Supply chain sustainability: a risk management 
approach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 171, 455–470. 


Gilmore, D., 2008. The war on supply chain complexity. Supply Chain Digest 21, 2008. 
August.  


Giunipero, L.C., Hooker, R.E., Denslow, D., 2012. Purchasing and supply management 
sustainability: drivers and barriers. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 18 (4), 258–269. 


Govindan, K., Azevedo, S.G., Carvalho, H., Cruz-Machado, V., 2013. Lean, green and 
resilient practices influence on supply chain performance: interpretive structural 
modeling approach. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 12 (1), 15–34. 


Govindan, K., Muduli, K., Devika, K., Barve, A., 2016. Investigation of the influential 
strength of factors on adoption of green supply chain management practices: an 
Indian mining scenario. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 107, 185–194, 2016.  


Gualandris, J., Kalchschmidt, M., 2014. Customer pressure and innovativeness: their role 
in sustainable supply chain management. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 92–103, 2014.  


Gunasekaran, A., Hong, P., Fujimoto, T., 2014. Building supply chain system capabilities 
in the age of global complexity: emerging theories and practices. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 
147, 189–197. PART B.  


Hashemi, a, Butcher, T., Chhetri, P., 2013. A modeling framework for the analysis of 
supply chain complexity using product design and demand characteristics. Int. J. 
Eng. Sci. Technol. 5 (2), 150–164. 


Hassini, E., Surti, C., Searcy, C., 2012. A literature review and a case study of sustainable 
supply chains with a focus on metrics. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (1), 69–82. 


Haverkamp, D., Bremmers, H., Omta, O., 2010. Stimulating environmental management 
performance. Br. Food J. 112 (11), 1237–1251. 


HSBC Navigator Survey, 2018. https://www.business.hsbc.com/en-gb/navigator. 
Hsu, C., Choon Tan, K., Hanim Mohamad Zailani, S., Jayaraman, V., 2013. Supply chain 


drivers that foster the development of green initiatives in an emerging economy. Int. 
J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 33 (6), 656–688. 


Hsu, C.-C., Tan, K.-C., Mohamad Zailani, S.H., 2016. Strategic orientations, sustainable 
supply chain initiatives, and reverse logistics. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 36 (1), 
86–110. 


Isik, F., 2011. Complexity in supply chains: a new approach to quantitative measurement 
of the supply-chain-complexity. In: Li, P. (Ed.), Supply Chain Management, 
pp. 184–188. 


Jayaraman, V., Luo, Y., 2007. Creating competitive advantages through new value 
creation: a reverse logistics perspective. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 21 (2), 56–73. 


JCB. Distributing more responsibly. https://www.jcb.com/en-in/company/sustainable-s 
olutions/distribution. 


Jia, P., Diabat, A., Mathiyazhagan, K., 2015. Analyzing the SSCM practices in the mining 
and mineral industry by ISM approach. Resour. Pol. 46, 76–85. 


Kannan, G., Pokharel, S., Sasi Kumar, P., 2009. A hybrid approach using ISM and fuzzy 
TOPSIS for the selection of reverse logistics provider. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 54 
(1), 28–36. 


Katiyar, R., Meena, P.L., Barua, M.K., Tibrewala, R., Kumar, G., 2018. Impact of 
sustainability and manufacturing practices on supply chain performance: findings 
from an emerging economy. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 197, 303–316. 


Kavilal, E.G., Prasanna Venkatesan, S., Harsh Kumar, K.D., 2017. An integrated fuzzy 
approach for prioritizing supply chain complexity drivers of an Indian mining 
equipment manufacturer. Resour. Pol. 51, 204–218. 


Kavilal, E.G., Venkatesan, S.P., Sanket, J., 2018. An integrated interpretive structural 
modeling and a graph-theoretic approach for measuring the supply chain complexity 
in the Indian automotive industry. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 29 (3), 478–514. 


Khalid, Z.B., Mufti, N.A., Ahmad, Y., 2016. Identifying and modeling barriers to 
collaboration among auto-parts manufacturing SMEs. Pak. Bus. Rev. 18 (2), 
487–507. 


K€oksal, D., Str€ahle, J., Müller, M., Freise, M., 2017. Social sustainable supply chain 
management in the textile and apparel industry—a literature review. Sustainability 
9 (1), 100. 


Krishnan, V., Gupta, S., 2001. Appropriateness and impact of platform- based product 
development. Manag. Sci. 47 (1), 52–68. 


Kumar, D., Rahman, Z., 2016. Buyer supplier relationship and supply chain 
sustainability: empirical study of Indian automobile industry. J. Clean. Prod. 131, 
836–848 h.  


Lawshe, C.H., 1975. A quantitative approach to content validity. Person. Psychol. 28 (4), 
563–575. 


Lim, M.K., Tseng, M.-L., Tan, K.H., Bui, T.D., 2017. Knowledge management in 
sustainable supply chain management: improving performance through an 
interpretive structural modelling approach. J. Clean. Prod. 162, 806–816. 


Linstone, H.A., Turoff, M., 2002. Delphi: a brief look backward and forward. Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Change 78 (9), 1712–1719. 


Loo, R., 2002. The Delphi method: a powerful tool for strategic management. Polic. An 
Int. J. Police Strategies Manag. 25 (4), 762–769. 


Lu, R., 2015. A Study Examines the Importance of Forecast Accuracy to Supply Chain 
Performance, the Contributing Factors and the Improvement Enablers in Practice. 


Luthra, S., Garg, D., Haleem, A., 2015. An analysis of interactions among critical success 
factors to implement green supply chain management towards sustainability: an 
Indian perspective. Resour. Pol. 46, 37–50. 


Luthra, S., Govindan, K., Kannan, D., Mangla, S.K., Garg, C.P., 2017. An integrated 
framework for sustainable supplier selection and evaluation in supply chains. 
J. Clean. Prod. 140, 1686–1698. 


Luzzini, D., Brandon-Jones, E., Brandon-Jones, A., Spina, G., 2015. From sustainability 
commitment to performance: the role of intra- and inter-firm collaborative 
capabilities in the upstream supply chain. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 165, 51–63. 


Majumdar, A., Sinha, S.K., 2018. Analyzing the barriers of green textile supply chain 
management in South-east Asia using interpretive structural modelling. Sustain. 
Prod. Consump. 


Malviya, R.K., Kant, R., 2017. Modeling the enablers of green supply chain management. 
Benchmark Int. J. 24 (2), 536–568. 


Manuj, I., Sahin, F., 2011. A model of supply chain and supply chain decision-making 
complexity. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 


Mariotti, J.L., 2008. The Complexity Crisis. Adams Media, Avon, MA.  
Mathiyazhagan, K., Haq, A.N., 2013. Analysis of the influential pressures for green 


supply chain management adoption—an Indian perspective using interpretive 
structural modeling. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 68 (1–4), 817–833. 


McCarthy, T.M., Golicic, S.L., 2002. Implementing collaborative forecasting to improve 
supply chain performance. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 32 (6), 431–454. 


McKinsey conversations with global leaders, 2010. Jim Owens of Caterpillar. https: 
//www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insi 
ghts/mckinsey-conversations-with-global-leaders-jim-owens-of-caterpillar. 


Meixell, M.J., Luoma, P., 2015. Stakeholder pressure in sustainable supply chain 
management. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 45 (1/2), 69–89. 


Ministry of mines. Annual report:2016-17. https://mines.gov.in/writereaddata/ 
UploadFile/Mines_AR_2016-17_English.pdf. 


Modak, M., Pathak, K., Ghosh, K.K., 2017. Performance evaluation of outsourcing 
decision using a BSC and Fuzzy AHP approach: a case of the Indian coal mining 
organization. Resour. Pol. 52, 181–191. 


Neuman, W.L., 2011. Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative 
Approaches. Pearson Education, Boston.  


Nielsen Global Corporate Sustainability Report, 2015. https://www.nielsen.com/eu/en 
/press-releases/2015/consumer-goods-brands-that-demonstrate-commitment-to- 
sustainability-outperform. 


Niti Ayog, August 2018. Sustainable development goals. https://www.niti.gov.in/writ 
ereaddata/files/SDGMapping-Document-NITI_0.pdf. 


Okoli, C., Pawlowski, S., 2004. The Delphi method as a research tool: an example, design 
considerations and applications. Inf. Manag. 42 (1), 15–29. 


Paulraj, A., Chen, I.J., Blome, C., 2015. Motives and performance outcomes of 
sustainable supply chain management practices: a multi-theoretical perspective. 
J. Bus. Ethics 25, 299, 2015.  


PARADIGM, 2017. Supply Chain Management: beyond the Horizon, MANAGING the 
COMPLEXITY PARADIGM, 2017. https://www.apics.org/docs/default-source/de 
fault-document-library/final-bth-msu-white-paper.pdf?sfvrsn¼e80612df_8. 


Poduval, P.S., Pramod, V.R., Jagathy Raj, V.P., 2015. Interpretive structural modeling 
(ISM) and its application in analyzing factors inhibiting implementation of total 
productive maintenance (TPM). Int. J. Qual. Reliab. Manag. 32 (3), 308–331. 


Raut, R.D., Narkhede, B., Gardas, B.B., 2017. To identify the critical success factors of 
sustainable supply chain management practices in the context of oil and gas 
industries: ISM approach. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 68, 33–47. 


Reiss, R., 2015. Supply chain leaders share How digital is transforming operations. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertreiss/2015/12/07/supply-chain-leaders-sh 
are-how-digital-is-transforming-operations/#148952294b04. 


Saeed, M., Kersten, W., 2019. Drivers of sustainable supply chain management: 
identification and classification. Sustainability 11 (4), 1137. 


Saeed, M.A., Waseek, I., Kersten, W., 2017. Literature review of drivers of sustainable 
supply chain management. In: Jahn, C., Kersten, W., Ringle, C.M. (Eds.), 
Digitalization in Maritime and Sustainable Logistics: City Logistics, Port Logistics 
and Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Digital Age. Epubli GmbH, Berlin, 
Germany, pp. 137–159, 2017.  


Sage, A.P., 1977. Interpretive Structural Modeling: Methodology for Large Scale Systems. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.  


Schrettle, S., Hinz, A., Scherrer -Rathje, M., Friedli, T., 2014. Turning sustainability into 
action: explaining firms’ sustainability efforts and their impact on firm performance. 
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 147, 73–84. 


Serdarasan, S., 2013. A review of supply chain complexity drivers. Comput. Ind. Eng. 66 
(3), 533–540. 


Seuring, S., Müller, M., 2008. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for 
sustainable supply chain management. J. Clean. Prod. 16 (15), 1699–1710. 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref31

https://dipp.gov.in/sites/default/files/FDI_Factsheet_12March2019.pdf

https://dipp.gov.in/sites/default/files/FDI_Factsheet_12March2019.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref34

https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3894387/predicts-2019-future-of-supply-chain-operations

https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3894387/predicts-2019-future-of-supply-chain-operations

https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3894387/predicts-2019-future-of-supply-chain-operations

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref36

https://geodis.com/in/newsroom/press-releases/geodis-unveils-its-2017-supply-chain-worldwide-survey

https://geodis.com/in/newsroom/press-releases/geodis-unveils-its-2017-supply-chain-worldwide-survey

https://www.pomsmeetings.org/confpapers/043/043-0203.pdf

https://www.pomsmeetings.org/confpapers/043/043-0203.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref47

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref49

https://www.business.hsbc.com/en-gb/navigator

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref54

https://www.jcb.com/en-in/company/sustainable-solutions/distribution

https://www.jcb.com/en-in/company/sustainable-solutions/distribution

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref58

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref61

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref68

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref78

https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/mckinsey-conversations-with-global-leaders-jim-owens-of-caterpillar

https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/mckinsey-conversations-with-global-leaders-jim-owens-of-caterpillar

https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/mckinsey-conversations-with-global-leaders-jim-owens-of-caterpillar

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref80

https://mines.gov.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/Mines_AR_2016-17_English.pdf

https://mines.gov.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/Mines_AR_2016-17_English.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref84

https://www.nielsen.com/eu/en/press-releases/2015/consumer-goods-brands-that-demonstrate-commitment-to-sustainability-outperform

https://www.nielsen.com/eu/en/press-releases/2015/consumer-goods-brands-that-demonstrate-commitment-to-sustainability-outperform

https://www.nielsen.com/eu/en/press-releases/2015/consumer-goods-brands-that-demonstrate-commitment-to-sustainability-outperform

https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/SDGMapping-Document-NITI_0.pdf

https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/SDGMapping-Document-NITI_0.pdf

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref87

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref88

https://www.apics.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/final-bth-msu-white-paper.pdf?sfvrsn=e80612df_8

https://www.apics.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/final-bth-msu-white-paper.pdf?sfvrsn=e80612df_8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref89

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref89

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref89

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref90

https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertreiss/2015/12/07/supply-chain-leaders-share-how-digital-is-transforming-operations/#148952294b04

https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertreiss/2015/12/07/supply-chain-leaders-share-how-digital-is-transforming-operations/#148952294b04

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref92

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref96

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref96

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref97




Resources Policy 68 (2020) 101726


18


Sharma, H.D., Gupta, A.D., Sushil, 1995. The objectives of waste management in India: a 
futures inquiry. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 48 (3), 285–309. 


Soni, G., Kodali, R., 2016. Interpretive structural modeling and path analysis for 
proposed framework of lean supply chain in Indian manufacturing industry. 
J. Industrial Prod. Eng. 33 (8), 501–515. 


Subramanian, N., Abdulrahman, M.D., Rahman, S., 2014. Sourcing complexity factors on 
contractual relationship: Chinese suppliers’ perspective. Prod. Manuf. Res. 2 (1), 
558–585. 


Tarei, P., Thakkar, J., Nag, B., 2018. A hybrid approach for quantifying supply chain risk 
and prioritizing the risk drivers: a case of Indian petroleum supply chain. J. Manuf. 
Technol. Manag. 29 (3), 533–569. 


Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Kirchoff, J.F., 2010. Corporate social responsibility reports: a 
thematic analysis related to supply chain management. J. Supply Chain Manag. 46 
(1), 19–44. 


Thirupathi, R.M., Vinodh, S., 2016. Application of interpretive structural modelling and 
structural equation modelling for analysis of sustainable manufacturing factors in 
Indian automotive component sector. Int. J. Prod. Res. 54 (22), 6661–6682. 


Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., Smart, P., 2003. Towards a methodology for developing 
evidence-informed management knowledge by means of a systematic review. Br. J. 
Manag. 14 (3), 207e222. 


Um, K.-H., Kim, S.-M., 2018. The effects of supply chain collaboration on performance 
and transaction cost advantage: the moderation and nonlinear effects of governance 
mechanisms. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 


UN Global Compact Office, Business for Social Responsibility, 2010. https://www.unglo 
balcompact.org/docs/issues_doc/supply_chain/SupplyChainRep_spread.pdf. 


United Nations Global Compact, 2016. https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is 
-gc/our-work/supply-chain. 


Varsei, M., Soosay, C., Fahimnia, B., Sarkis, J., 2014. Framing sustainability performance 
of supply chains with multidimensional indicators. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 19 
(3), 242–257. 


Vasanthakumar, C., Vinodh, S., Ramesh, K., 2016. Application of interpretive structural 
modelling for analysis of factors influencing lean remanufacturing practices. Int. J. 
Prod. Res. 54 (24), 7439–7452. 


Venkatesh, V.G., Rathi, S., Patwa, S., 2015. Analysis on supply chain risks in Indian 
apparel retail chains and proposal of risk prioritization model using Interpretive 
structural modeling. J. Retailing Consum. Serv. 26, 153–167. 


Walker, H., Jones, N., 2012. Sustainable supply chain management across the UK private 
sector. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 17 (1), 15–28. 


Walker, H., Di Sisto, L., McBain, D., 2008. Drivers and barriers to environmental supply 
chain management practices: lessons from the public and private sectors. J. Purch. 
Supply Manag. 14 (1), 69–85. 


Wang, Z., Sarkis, J., 2013. Investigating the relationship of sustainable supply chain 
management with corporate financial performance. Int. J. Prod. Perform. Manag. 62 
(8), 871–888. 


Warfield, J.W., 1974. Developing interconnected matrices in structural modelling. IEEE 
Trans. Sys. Men Cyber. 4 (1), 51–81. 


Watson, R.H., 1973. ‘Interpretive structural modelling – a useful tool for technology 
assessment?’. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 11 (2), 165–185. 


Yadav, D.K., Barve, A., 2015. Analysis of critical success factors of humanitarian supply 
chain: an application of Interpretive Structural Modeling. Int. J.Dis. Risk Red. 12, 
213–225. 


Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., 2007. The moderating effects of institutional pressures on emergent 
green supply chain practices and performance. Int. J. Prod. Res. 45 (18–19), 
4333–4355. 


Further reading 


Department of Heavy Industries (DHI), 2017-18. Annual Report. Ministry of heavy 
industries and public enterprises. https://dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/DHI_2017- 
18_annual_report/mobile/index.html. 


United Nation Global, 2010. Compact Office and Business for Social Responsibility. https 
://www.unglobalcompact.org/dpcs/news_events/8.1/UNGC_Annual_Review_2010. 
pdf. 


Pushpendu Chand is pursuing PhD at Vinod Gupta School of Management, Indian 
Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, India. He has more than 15 years of work expe-
rience in different manufacturing industry. 


Jitesh J. Thakkar is an Associate Professor at the Department of Industrial and Systems 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, India. He has published 
research in the areas of Lean & Sustainable manufacturing, Supply Chain Management, 
Quality Management, Small and Medium Enterprises and Performance Measurement. The 
publications have appeared in the leading journals –Journal of Cleaner Production, Pro-
duction Planning and Control, Computers & Industrial Engineering, International Journal 
of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Journal of Manufacturing Technology Manage-
ment, and International Journal of Productivity and Performance Measurement. He is an 
Editorial Board member and Guest Editor for International Journal of Lean Six Sigma, 
Emerald. He extends his services as a reviewer to the reputed international journals in the 
area of Operations Management. 


Kunal Kanti Ghosh is Visiting Professor at the Vinod Gupta School of Management, Indian 
Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, India. He has published research in the areas of 
Supply Chain Management, Operations Management. He is teaching subjects like Supply 
Chain Management, Supply Chain Analytics, Production & Operations Management to 
name a few. 


P. Chand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref102

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref104

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref104

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref104

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref105

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref105

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/issues_doc/supply_chain/SupplyChainRep_spread.pdf

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/issues_doc/supply_chain/SupplyChainRep_spread.pdf

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/our-work/supply-chain

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/our-work/supply-chain

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref112

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref112

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref117

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref117

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref117

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref118

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0301-4207(20)30217-8/sref118

https://dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/DHI_2017-%2018_annual_report/mobile/index.html

https://dhi.nic.in/writereaddata/DHI_2017-%2018_annual_report/mobile/index.html

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/dpcs/news_events/8.1/UNGC_Annual_Review_2010.pdf

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/dpcs/news_events/8.1/UNGC_Annual_Review_2010.pdf

https://www.unglobalcompact.org/dpcs/news_events/8.1/UNGC_Annual_Review_2010.pdf


