









Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


International Journal of Production Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe


Review


Achieving sustainable performance in a data-driven agriculture supply
chain: A review for research and applications
Sachin S. Kamblea, Angappa Gunasekaranb,∗, Shradha A. Gawankarc
a Associate Professor of Operations and Supply Chain Management, National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Mumbai, 400087, India
bDean and Professor, School of Business and Public Administration, California State University, Bakersfield, 9001 Stockdale Highway, 20BDC/140, Bakersfield, CA,
93311-1022, USA
c Fellow (Operations and Supply Chain Management), National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Mumbai, 400087, India


A R T I C L E I N F O


Keywords:
Agriculture supply chain
Food supply chain
Sustainability
Sustainable performance
Supply chain visibility
Big data
Blockchain
Data analytics
Supply chain resources


A B S T R A C T


The lack of industrialization, inadequacy of the management, information inaccuracy, and inefficient supply
chains are the significant issues in an agri-food supply chain. The proposed solutions to overcome these chal-
lenges should not only consider the way the food is produced but also take care of societal, environmental and
economic concerns. There has been increasing use of emerging technologies in the agriculture supply chains. The
internet of things, the blockchain, and big data technologies are potential enablers of sustainable agriculture
supply chains. These technologies are driving the agricultural supply chain towards a digital supply chain en-
vironment that is data-driven. Realizing the significance of a data-driven sustainable agriculture supply chain we
extracted and reviewed 84 academic journals from 2000 to 2017. The primary purpose of the review was to
understand the level of analytics used (descriptive, predictive and prescriptive), sustainable agriculture supply
chain objectives attained (social, environmental and economic), the supply chain processes from where the data
is collected, and the supply chain resources deployed for the same. Based on the results of the review, we propose
an application framework for the practitioners involved in the agri-food supply chain that identifies the supply
chain visibility and supply chain resources as the main driving force for developing data analytics capability and
achieving the sustainable performance. The framework will guide the practitioners to plan their investments to
build a robust data-driven agri-food supply chain. Finally, we outline the future research directions and lim-
itations of our study.


1. Introduction


There is increased awareness and growing concern for environ-
mental, social, and economic effects on food production and con-
sumption. This has led to increasing pressure from consumer organi-
zations, social and environmental advocacy groups, agro-based
organizations and policymakers to develop sustainable supply chains
(Allaoui et al., 2017). The current consumption patterns and ever-in-
creasing population poses severe concerns on the agri-food supply chain
(AFSC) (Network, 2012). The sustainable outcome of an AFSC is based
on achieving a balance between economic growth, environmental
protection, and social development. The main difference between a
consumer supply chain and the AFSC is that the raw materials in AFSC
are grown using different agricultural practices, and both the human
and animals consume the final products. However, both the supply
chains have suppliers, focal companies, customers, logistics and


distribution networks, and retailing centers as their principal compo-
nents (Miranda-Ackerman and Azzaro-Pantel, 2017). Since the world
summit on sustainable development, there have been many initiatives
for sustainable development in different sectors (Van Huijstee et al.,
2007). The agriculture sector has received the highest prominence
among these sectors for achieving sustainable growth with the focus on
adopting best management practices in agriculture and farming, and
improvements in the social and ecological conditions (Potts et al., 2014;
Castro and Swart, 2017; Dentoni and Peterson, 2011). The significant
issues that need to be addressed to achieve sustainable AFSC are lack of
involvement of the small farmers, lack of stringent norms to control
food safety and quality (Naik and Suresh, 2018), lack of industrializa-
tion, the inadequacy of the management, and information inaccuracy
(Luthra et al., 2018).


The emerging solutions to overcome these challenges should not
only consider the way the food is produced but also take care of the


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022
Received 9 July 2018; Received in revised form 30 March 2019; Accepted 27 May 2019


∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: sachin@nitie.ac.in (S.S. Kamble), agunasekaran@csub.edu (A. Gunasekaran), gawankar.shradha@gmail.com (S.A. Gawankar).



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09255273

























https://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022

mailto:sachin@nitie.ac.in

mailto:agunasekaran@csub.edu

mailto:gawankar.shradha@gmail.com

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022&domain=pdf




societal concerns, environmental concerns, food safety and quality re-
quirements, and economic viability. Further, these solutions should not
be limited to agricultural production but cover the entire supply chain
that includes food processing, packaging, distribution, and consump-
tion (Donald, 2008; Charles et al., 2010). One of the primary focus
areas in sustainability is the cooperation between the various supply
chain members and the significant challenges that hinder achieving
sustainable outcomes. There has been increasing use of new emerging
technologies in the AFSCs which helps in improved supply chain deci-
sion making. In the recent past, we have seen emerging technologies
bringing a significant impact on the supply chain sustainability (Kamble
et al., 2018). Technologies such as the internet of things (IoT) supports
collection and sharing of information in real-time. IoT has the potential
to augment the sustainability of the AFSC through improved commu-
nication, coordination and cooperation between nodes of the supply
chain (Ahumada and Villalobos, 2009). IoT and sensor technologies
have been found useful in reducing the demand-supply gap and ad-
dressing the issue of food quality and security (Wang and Yue, 2017;
Zhong et al., 2017). The voluminous data generated by the IoT can be
analyzed by using big data analytics that may help in identifying the
weaknesses of the AFSC (Verdouw et al., 2016). Blockchain technology
also promises to be a significant enabler of a sustainable agriculture
supply chain (Sharma et al., 2018). All these emerging technologies are
driving the traditional AFSC towards a digital supply chain environ-
ment that is data-driven. With this transformation, it becomes necessary
for the organizations to achieve a high level of supply chain visibility
(SCV) making the required information readily available to the decision
makers for developing sustainable supply chain strategies. In the lit-
erature there are few studies that have reviewed the dimensions of
AFSC sustainability, which include developing perspectives on food
waste and information (Irani and Sharif, 2016), identifying the drivers,
barriers and indicators of sustainable supply chain performance
(Govindan, 2018), understanding the dynamic capabilities of food in-
dustry (Beske et al., 2014) and collaborative behavioral factors (Dania
et al., 2018). The massive and rich data that is generated in the data-
driven AFSC may bring enormous challenges that include data collec-
tion, data storage, data visualization and information sharing that
needs to be addressed by developing new data-driven decision models
and frameworks (Zhong et al., 2017).


However, the literature on sustainable AFSC lacks decision-making
or application frameworks that can help the academicians and practi-
tioners to understand how sustainable performance can be achieved in
a data-driven environment. The existing literature on AFSC lacks in-
formation on the critical components of data analytics capability (DAC)
and the impact it has on sustainable performance. More information is
required to understand the level of analytics used (descriptive, pre-
dictive and prescriptive), sustainable agriculture supply chain objec-
tives attained (social, environmental and economic), the supply chain
processes that contribute in developing the information visibility, and
the supply chain resources used for data collection, analysis and sharing
across the AFSC. More specifically, the study attempts to seek in-
formation to the following research questions (RQ):
RQ1. What sustainable performance outcomes are achieved by AFSC?
RQ2. What level of data analytics drive these sustainable outcomes?
RQ3.Which supply chain resources are deployed to develop the DAC of
the AFSC?
RQ4. Which supply chain processes delivers high information visibility
in an AFSC?
RQ5. How the supply chain resources, information visibility, DAC are
linked together to in a sustainable AFSC?


A systematic review is conducted to investigate the landscape of
state-of-art literature on the linkages between a data-driven AFSC and
sustainable performance, guided by the above research questions. To


this effect, we have employed theoretical lenses of resource dependency
and the content analysis approach for analyzing the above research
questions. Subsequently, the results of the above RQs are used to de-
velop an application framework for data-driven sustainable AFSC that
integrates the concepts of supply chain resources, SCV, DAC, and sus-
tainable performance. The application framework will be highly useful
for the AFSC practitioners to plan their investments to transform the
existing AFSCs into a data-driven sustainable AFSC. The remainder of
the paper is structured as follows: section 2 presents the review meth-
odology. The review discussions are presented in section 3. Section 4
presents the implications for practitioners and proposed application
framework for data-driven sustainable AFSC. The directions for future
research are given in section 6, and section 7 presents the conclusions
and limitations of the study.


2. Review methodology


The topic sustainable AFSC selected for the review is quite abstract
and therefore, analyzing the published literature and considering them
as the primary source of material was felt more effective (Jauch et al.,
1980; Beske et al., 2014). As the objective of the study was to review
the present status of literature in the area of sustainable AFSC, we
conducted a systematic literature review combined with content ana-
lysis as proposed by Mayring (2003). The applied methodology used a
four-step iterative process that consisted of: (i) material collection, (ii)
descriptive analysis, (iii) category selection, and (iv) material evalua-
tion. The dimensions and analytic categories used for classifying the
contents in this approach could be derived deductively or inductively,
allowing traceability and inter-subject verifiability as compared to
other qualitative interpretive methods (Seuring and Gold, 2012). The
dimensions and analytic categories used in our review process were
derived from the existing supply chain management literature before
analyzing the content from the selected papers. Similar review ap-
proaches were used by Seuring and Müller (2008), Kannan et al.
(2014), Gao et al. (2016), and Arunachalam et al. (2018) and by now is
a traditional approach which has been applied in many papers (Seuring
and Gold, 2012).


2.1. Material collection


To have holistic coverage of all the possible sustainable practices in
AFSC a structured keyword search was conducted on the ISI Web of
Science (WoS) database. The WoS database has a rich collection of
publications like Springer, IEEE, Elsevier, Taylor, and Francis, etc., and
is known for its comprehensive coverage of high impact journals pub-
lished in English language (Chadegani et al., 2013) The basic search
criteria included that the papers were published during the year
2010–17. The following keywords were searched to be in title or key-
words: “sustainable,” “supply chain,” and an alternation between
“food,” “agri-products,” “agri-food,” “agriculture,” and “farm.” This
ensured that at the first level all the selected papers (n= 128 papers)
had an established link between the various dimensions of sustain-
ability and agriculture supply chain. In the second level, the abstracts of
the selected papers were reviewed for its relevance to the scope of the
study. Twenty papers were excluded with the number of papers redu-
cing to 108, as they were more focused on the agriculture supply chain
and not AFSC. In the third level, the reduction in papers (to n=94) was
achieved by excluding the papers that dealt with the sustainable supply
chain issues in animal husbandry (meat, wool, dairy, fish, etc.). This
specific exclusion criterion was applied as the animal husbandry supply
chain relates to “the branch of agriculture that deals with the animals that
are raised for meat fiber, milk, eggs, etc., and includes day to daycare, se-
lective breeding and raising of livestock” (Wikipedia, n. d) and differed
from the primary AFSC in terms of the required quality and safety
parameters, mandatory certifications (Krystallis and Arvanitoyannis,
2006) and other influencing factors in decision making such as


S.S. Kamble, et al.










































consumers religion and culture (Manikas et al., 2017). In the fourth
level, the 94 papers were subjected to full reading by the authors re-
sulting in the selection of 84 papers for the final review.


Further, other research papers dealing with the concepts of sus-
tainable AFSC, cited within the selected 84 papers were also referred to
get detailed insights on the topic. This snowball analysis assured that
valuable knowledge within the scope of our RQs was captured from the
papers not selected through our search process. Most of the articles
selected for final review were obtained from the International Journal of
Production Economics (13%), Journal of Cleaner Production (13%) and
Sustainability (12%). The detailed journal wise distribution of the se-
lected 84 articles is presented in appendix 1. The planned selection
process of the papers is presented in Fig. 1.


2.2. Descriptive analysis


2.2.1. Year wise publication details
Fig. 2 indicates that the number of papers published on the topic of


sustainable AFSC. The trend in the publications on sustainable AFSC
suggests increasing attention from researchers on this topic since 2011.
The selected 84 papers are from 44 different journals, in which only
three journals published ten or more papers (See Appendix 1), in-
dicating that this topic is covered in a great variety of journals and has
attracted the interest of journals with high impact factors. Further, the
first authors’ country affiliation reveals that majority of the publications
originated from Italy and United Kingdom (thirteen papers each) fol-
lowed by USA, Germany, and the Netherlands with ten, seven and six
contributions respectively.


2.2.2. Sustainable AFSC papers based on the type of research methods
The authors considered three research methodologies for classifi-


cation of selected papers: conceptual, empirical-surveys and empirical-


case studies. The papers based on empirical-surveys and empirical-case
studies are focused on visible or measurable sustainable AFSC practices
and processes. The conceptual papers presented ideas, theories, fra-
meworks, benefits and challenges in achieving a sustainable AFSC.
From the selected papers 84 papers, 40 papers (47.6%) used empirical-
case study approach, 28 papers (33.33%) were conceptually based and
remaining 16 papers (19%) used empirical-surveys.


2.3. Review classification framework


The primary purpose of the category selection is to conceptualize
the classification framework for our research. Structural dimensions
and analytic categories support to organize the classification frame-
work. Four critical structural dimensions were used to answer the re-
search questions raised in our study: sustainable AFSC outcomes, level
of analytics, SCV, and supply chain resources.


2.3.1. Sustainable performance outcomes of AFSC
Seuring and Müller (2008) define sustainable supply chain man-


agement as “the management of material, information, and capital flows as
well as cooperation among companies along the supply chain while taking
goals from all three dimensions of sustainable development, i.e., economic,
environmental and social, into account which are derived from customer and
stakeholder requirements.” Referred to as the triple bottom line,
Elkington (1998) suggests that there has to be a balanced focus on the
three sustainability dimensions. An organizations failure to perform on
any one of these three pillars of sustainability will make the supply
chain unsustainable (Govindan, 2018). In our study, we have used the
triple bottom line approach as the three sustainable outcomes of AFSC.
The selected papers have been classified on social, economic and en-
vironmental dimensions of sustainability.


2.3.2. Supply chain visibility
Visibility ensures “that important information is readily available to


those who need it, inside and outside the organization, for monitoring,
controlling and changing supply chain strategy and operations, from service
acquisition to delivery” (Schoenthaler, 2003). SCV is not only the avail-
ability of the information, but is also determined by the accuracy of the
shared data, timeliness, usefulness and the structure of the data (Barratt
and Oke, 2007; Bailey and Pearson, 1983; Gustin et al., 1995; Mohr and
Sohi, 1995). Barratt and Oke (2007) define SCV as “the extent to which
actors within a supply chain have access to or share information which they
consider as key or useful to their operations and which they consider will be
of mutual benefit.” The SCV for any firm is achieved from the informa-
tion being collected from the downstream and upstream activities of the
supply chain and includes data related to the actual sales, forecasted
demand, customer preferences, reactions, inventory, manufacturing,
and delivery lead times, etc.


Moreover, these downstream and upstream data can be categorized
in the five areas of supply chain management processes namely: plan,
source, make, deliver and return. Literature suggests developing virtual


Fig. 1. Article selection process.


2 1 1 1
3 3


10 10


26 25


2


0


5


10


15


20


25


30


2005 2008 2009 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


Fig. 2. Year-wise distribution of papers.


S.S. Kamble, et al.














supply chains using IoT and sensors that can support the supply chain
partners to control and coordinate from any location without having
any physical access to the products (Verdouw et al., 2013; Verdouw
et al., 2016). An active virtual SCV is expected to manage the dynamic
operations of AFSC effectively (Saguy et al., 2013; Porter and
Heppelmann, 2014; Verdouw et al., 2015). A virtual SCV will support
monitoring, control, planning and optimization of AFSC processes in
real-time, from remote locations thus addressing the various issues of
AFSC sustainability (Verdouw et al., 2015). The previous studies reveal
that both the visibility of demand and supply characteristics are re-
quired by the organizations (Barratt and Barratt, 2011).


The Supply Chain Operational Reference (SCOR) (Supply Chain
Council, 2010) is considered as one of the rigorous supply chain per-
formance evaluation and strategic decision-making tool (Hwang et al.,
2008; Zangoueinezhad et al., 2011). When aligned with the supply
chain strategy, the SCOR model improves the SCV (Ntabe et al., 2015).
The level 1 of the SCOR hierarchical structure consisting of the defi-
nitions of the five supply chain management processes. The four pro-
cesses viz., Source, Make, Deliver, and Return represents the information
and physical flow, and are coordinated by the Plan process (Huang
et al., 2005; Hwang et al., 2008; Kasi, 2005; SC Council, 2008). The
source process represents all the activities and processes about the
procurement of raw material, vendor management, and supplier eva-
luations. All the operations that are performed during the transforming
of raw material into the finished products are included in the make
process. All the activities concerned with the transportation and dis-
tribution of finished products are included in the deliver process, and
the activities performed while returning the product to suppliers from
customers is included in the return process. The demand and the supply
gaps, with the use of appropriate supply chain resources, are addressed
by the plan process (Persson, 2011). In our study, we use the different
SCOR processes for assessing the information requirement (visibility) of
the AFSC. Furthermore, the literature reports the use of SCOR frame-
work to manage the AFSC performance management. SCOR is usually
associated with the use in manufacturing industries. However, the re-
searchers suggest that the modern data-driven agriculture supply chain
is highly comparable with a production based system, incorporating the
activities related to planting, breeding, processing, production, trans-
portation, and delivery (Lianguang, 2014; Ahoa et al., 2018). SCOR
framework can be used to improve information visibility, supply-de-
mand balance, food safety standards, recall management (Lianguang,
2014) and identify performance metrics and practices in AFSC (Ahoa
et al., 2018). Ahoa et al. (2018). SCOR framework is a useful tool to
identify relative strengths and weaknesses, to improve the operational
efficiency of AFSC (Hossain and Jahan, 2015; Weerabahu and
Nanayakkara, 2015; Ramos et al., 2018; Peña-Orozco and Rivera,
2017).


2.3.3. Level of analytics
The selected papers were classified in three analytic categories viz.,


descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytics. The chosen taxonomy
for the level of analytics has been widely adopted in the literature
(Wang et al., 2016a; Barbosa et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2017). De-
scriptive analytics is considered the most straightforward analytical
technique with the purpose to describe and summarize the past and the
present events in meaningful information (Barbosa et al., 2017). De-
scriptive analytics deals with the identification of problems and op-
portunities using necessary statistical tools and techniques (Wang et al.,
2016a). Predictive analytics uses statistical and other mathematical
methods to find predictive patterns based on past historical data (Delen
and Demirkan, 2013). The prescriptive analytics uses multi-criteria
decision-making (MCDM) techniques, optimization, and simulation
techniques and goes way beyond the descriptive and predictive analy-
tics.


2.3.4. Supply chain resources
A firm's competitive advantage is an outcome of efficient manage-


ment of supply chain resources and requires high coordination between
the firm's activities, information sharing capability, and its stake-
holders. Managing the supply chain resources is a complex activity and
involves decision-making processes at various levels (Reefke et al.,
2014; Correia et al., 2017). As per the resource-based view (RBV), the
sustainable competitive advantage can be achieved through the ac-
quisition of, and control over supply chain resources. The RBV further
explains that the supply chain resources and capabilities are associated
with a competitive advantage (Wernerfelt, 1984; Barney, 1991; Peteraf,
1993). The supply chain resources can be categorized into tangible
(e.g., physical) and intangible (e.g., organizational knowledge) assets
that support the activities related to production and delivery of goods
and services (Penrose, 1959; Grant, 1991; Amit and Schoemaker, 1993;
Gupta and George, 2016.). However, the achievement of such an ad-
vantage is determined by the extent to which the organization has ac-
quired and developed these resources and capabilities (Barney, 1991).
Barney (1991), Peteraf (1993) and Rungtusanatham et al. (2003)
identified five characteristics of resources, referred VRINN (valuable,
rare, not imitable, imperfectly mobile and not substitutable), these re-
sources support the firms in achieving a sustainable competitive ad-
vantage. In the supply chain management literature these resources are
classified in six types namely: financial, physical, human (managerial
and technical skills), organizational, technological and intangible (re-
putation, brand recognition, data-driven culture, and organizational
learning) (Braganza et al., 2017). The detailed SLR classification for the
selected 84 papers is presented in Appendix II. The papers presented in
each category are not necessarily mutually exclusive.


3. Review findings on data-driven sustainable agriculture supply
chain


3.1. Sustainable agri-food supply chain


The literature on AFSC sustainability suggests that the majority of
the environmental and social initiatives result in the enhanced eco-
nomic performance of the supply chain. There exists a considerable
overlap between the environmental, social, and economic sustainability
dimensions. The findings suggest that a balanced approach in-
corporating ecological, social, and economic performance is required to
achieve sustainable AFSC. Our study reveals that the environmental
concerns have received more attention in the literature (92%, 77 out of
84 papers), followed by economic (54%, 46 out of 84 papers) and social
(51%, 43 out of 84 papers) sustainability dimensions. The findings in-
dicate that the various agents involved in the AFSC have not solely
focused on attaining social or environmental goals, neglecting the fi-
nancial objectives. The multiple aspects of sustainable AFSC that
emerged from our review are discussed below.


3.1.1. Social sustainability in AFSC
Development of shortened supply chain as a competitive and sur-


vival strategy for the small farmers was found to be the central theme of
research for the papers dealing with social sustainability. The short
supply chain facilitates the high involvement of farmers in the supply
chain, community development, and youth development. The in-
itiatives such as the development of open markets and regional food
hub are found to have a positive influence on the farmer's commu-
nication skills and interpersonal relations (Chiffoleau et al., 2016;
Giampietri et al., 2016; Berti and Mulligan, 2016). Few studies identi-
fied that the alternative supply chain, such as wholesale produce auc-
tions through competitive bidding (Johnson et al., 2016), an organic
community supported farming (Doernberg et al., 2016), and focusing
on local products (Schmitt et al., 2016) provide more opportunities for
the farmers. However, the literature identifies issues such as inadequate
access to land, high rentals, limited processing capacity, and hostile


S.S. Kamble, et al.










































political environment as the significant challenges to develop alter-
native supply chains. The inclusion of the small farmers in the supply
chain and providing a robust institutional arrangement is highly es-
sential to achieve social sustainability goals of an AFSC leading to in-
creased productivity, rural development and land sparing (Jelsma et al.,
2017). Shukla and Tiwari (2017) recommend that the decisions in AFSC
should be data-driven and involve the small farmers. Other studies dealt
with the use of alternate packaging material at the retail stores for in-
ducing resource-efficient behavior in both suppliers and consumers,
and also support the social benefits by providing higher transparency
(Beitzen-Heineke et al., 2017). Youth involvement, as a social outcome
of AFSC, can be improved by developing the linkages between the hotel
industry and AFSC (Thomas-Francois et al., 2017a, 2017b).


3.1.2. Environmental sustainability in AFSC
Majority of the papers selected for the review (77 out of 84 papers)


addressed the issue of environmental sustainability in AFSC. Most of the
studies carried the life cycle assessments of the production systems
(Recanati et al., 2018; Rebolledo-Leiva et al., 2017; Miranda-Ackerman
et al., 2017; Egilmez et al., 2014; Dobon et al., 2011a, 2011b). The
studies on environmental sustainability in AFSC can be categorized into
three main categories viz., the issue of carbon footprints (Miranda-
Ackerman and Azzaro-Pantel, 2017), food waste (Sgarbossa and Russo,
2017; Irani and Sharif, 2016) and food quality and security due to the
extended supply chains (Ting et al., 2014; Kaipia et al., 2013; Irani and
Sharif, 2016; Derqui et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2017). The organizations in
an AFSC are required to be proactive in developing practices, which
encourage resource recovery from waste (Sgarbossa and Russo, 2017;
Xia et al., 2016). The literature on AFSC identifies prevention as the
best solution to address the problem of food waste. Derqui et al. (2016)
reports that the literature on food waste minimization are mostly fo-
cused on economic considerations, and the social and environmental
concerns are often neglected. Increasing population, their aspirational
needs, climate change, soil erosion and irrigation, water scarcity, and
the declining incremental levels of yield are identified as the critical
challenges for food security (Irani and Sharif, 2016). Development of
short supply chains and preference for local food products was also
found to be an effective strategy for preservation and development of
urban agriculture, addressing the issue of food quality and security
(Cojocariu, 2012; Thomson et al., 2017).


3.1.3. Economic sustainability
The studies on economic sustainability are aimed at reducing the


overall supply chain costs and deal with specific solutions to minimize
the transportation and supply chain design costs (Musavi and Bozorgi-
Amiri, 2017). Most of these studies had the social and environmental
impact as the secondary objectives, that included minimization of total
carbon emissions, water footprint, and jobs created (Allaoui et al.,
2017; Accorsi et al., 2016). Similar to the strategies recommended for
socially and environmentally sustainable AFSC, short supply chains and
buying local food products are identified as the sustainable strategy
providing ecological, health and socio-economic benefits (Schmitt
et al., 2017; Ilbery and Maye, 2005). Collective action strategies with
robust institutional arrangement by the farmers (Jelsma et al., 2017),
alternative packaging (Battini et al., 2016), partially guaranteed prices
(Tang et al., 2016), and revenue sharing contracts between the buyers
and farmers (Yan et al., 2015) are also identified as effective strategies
for developing economically sustainable AFSC.


3.2. Data-driven agri-food supply chain


With the use of smart equipment and sensors in the farming pro-
cesses, the AFSC is becoming more data-driven, and data enabled
(Wolfert et al., 2017). Various applications of IoT and cloud computing
technologies are pushing the traditional agricultural practices towards
smart farming (Sundmaeker et al., 2010). The data available through


these technological advances is so large and complex that the conven-
tional data processing applications are inadequate to analyze them. The
new data-driven supply chains will be required to equip themselves
with a set of data analysis techniques and technologies with new levels
of integration so that meaningful intelligence from these complex da-
tasets are extracted making the supply chain efficient (Hashem et al.,
2015). As the stakeholders in the AFSC that includes the farmers,
agricultural corporations and government scientists are requesting for
more access to large datasets to drive their decision making, not more is
emerging on how these data is going to be understood and managed
(Bronson and Knezevic, 2016). We reviewed all the selected papers on
the level of analytics viz., descriptive, predictive and prescriptive ana-
lytics. The discussions on the level of analytics in AFSC with sustainable
objectives are discussed in this section. It was found from that the
majority of the papers used descriptive analytics (74%, 62 out of 84
papers), followed by prescriptive analytics (21%, 18 out of 84 papers).
It was surprising to find that the studies on achieving sustainable AFSC
used very little of predictive analytics (5%, four out of 84 papers).


3.2.1. Descriptive analytics
Majority of the papers (62 out of 84 papers) selected for review used


descriptive analytics for analyzing the sustainable AFSC. The life cycle
assessment was found to be the widely used descriptive analytics tool
addressing the environmental concerns of the AFSC (Recanati et al.,
2018; Garofalo et al., 2017; Gamboa et al., 2016; Peano et al., 2015).
Descriptive analytics finds application in analyzing the extensive
misuse of resources addressing the issue of food waste (Kiil et al., 2017;
Sgarbossa and Russo, 2017; Derqui et al., 2016; Irani and Sharif, 2016;
Kaipia et al., 2013; Xia et al., 2016), in design and development of
alternate supply chains (Forssell and Lankoski, 2015). Many studies
used descriptive analytics to study the effectiveness of short supply
chains using different strategies, that included development of farmer
markets or food hubs (Giampietri et al., 2016; Berti and Mulligan,
2016), community selling (Fayet and Vermeulen, 2014), improved
communication between the farmers and the retailers (Tsuchiya et al.,
2015), collaborative farming (León-Bravo et al., 2017; Heard et al.,
2018) and competitive bidding markets (Johnson et al., 2016). Dif-
ferent studies demonstrating the benefit of emerging technologies such
as RFID (Yan et al., 2015), biotechnology (Björnberg et al., 2015) and
postharvest technologies (Chimphango and Görgens, 2015) for im-
proved traceability used descriptive analytics.


3.2.2. Predictive analytics
Only four percent of the studies used predictive analytics. Its ap-


plications ranged from developing a real-time data monitoring system
for maintaining the quality sustainability of the products using a pre-
warning system, identifying safety risks (Wang and Yue, 2017), pre-
dicting the sustainable performance (Bourlakis et al., 2014) and eva-
luation of green wrapping films for use in packaging of fruits (Giuggioli
et al., 2016).


3.2.3. Prescriptive analytics
Twenty-one percent of the selected papers used prescriptive analy-


tics. Majority of the studies using prescriptive analytics were based on
using Multi-criteria Decision Making (MCDM) techniques. Analytic
hierarchy process and the ordered weighted averaged aggregation
method was used for optimizing the supplier selection (Allaoui et al.,
2017). A combination of TOPSIS, VIKOR, and GRA methods in a fuzzy
environment was used for green supplier evaluation (Banaeian et al.,
2018). MCDA techniques were also used for designing green supply
chain network design (Miranda-Ackerman and Azzaro-Pantel, 2017;
Validi et al., 2014), identifying the key barriers to the implementation
of green supply chain management practices (Wang et al., 2016b), and
evaluating the supply chain sustainability performance (Yakovleva
et al., 2012). Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) was used to maximize
productivity and reduce the greenhouse gas emissions involved carbon


S.S. Kamble, et al.






footprint assessment (Rebolledo-Leiva et al., 2017). Meta-heuristics was
used for determining the number and location of the facilities (Kannan
et al., 2014) and solving the hub location-vehicle scheduling model
with the consideration of perishability of products total CO2 emission of
the network (Musavi and Bozorgi-Amiri, 2017). Nonlinear optimization
problem and constraint programming were used for the sustainable
design of refrigerated automated storage and retrieval systems to
minimize the total yearly cost of the automatic storage facility
(Meneghetti and Monti (2015). Van Der Vorst et al. (2009) performed
discrete simulation integrating the parameters of food quality, logistics,
and sustainability.


3.3. Supply chain visibility


3.3.1. SCV across different SCOR processes
The analysis of the distribution of papers based on the information


used for decision-making in different SCOR area reveals that the plan
area has received the maximum attention from the researchers (64%,
54 out of 84 papers), followed by the deliver process (25%, 21 out of 84
papers). The source and make have received very little attention with
seven percent (six out of 84 papers) and three percent (three out of 84
papers) published in these areas respectively. We found that there are
no papers on the return process. This may be because the agri-products
are consumption items and in most of the cases the activity of returning
the food products to the producer in a closed loop supply chain does not
arise.


3.3.2. Data analytics and supply chain visibility
To get insights on which supply chain areas contribute for increased


SCV and what type of analytics are deployed to process the collected
data, we analyzed the selected papers on how the different levels of
analytics are applied across the different SCOR areas. The summarized
result is presented in Table 1.


Table 1 reveals that the plan area received maximum attention in
the literature with 54 papers (77%). Forty-two papers in this area used
descriptive analytics in the form of empirical studies and concept based
papers. Out of the remaining papers in the plan process, nine papers
used prescriptive analytics, and only three papers used predictive
analytics. Out of the six papers in the source process five of them used
descriptive analytics, one paper used prescriptive analytics. None of the
papers in the source process used predictive analytics. Similar trends
were observed in the make and deliver area with descriptive analytics
gaining more focus, followed by prescriptive analytics. All three papers
in the make process used descriptive analytics. In the deliver process
the descriptive papers were used in twelve studies (57%) and pre-
scriptive analytics in eight papers (38%). The findings from Table 1
indicate that descriptive and prescriptive analytics is the most preferred
techniques for analyzing the issues concerned with sustainable perfor-
mance in AFSC.


3.3.3. Supply chain resources
Fig. 3 shows the different supply chain resources deployed by the


organizations to develop the visibility and DAC to achieve sustainable
objectives. Organizational resources were found to be implemented to a


maximum extent followed by human resources (42%). The other re-
sources viz., technological, intangibles and financial resources were
found to be used to a moderate extent (21%, 22%, and 17% respec-
tively). Physical resources were used in only eight percent of the stu-
dies.


The papers were analyzed to understand how these resources are
deployed across the different SCOR areas to achieve improved visibility.
Table 2 presents the detailed cross-tabulation for the supply chain re-
sources and SCV. The results reveal that supply chain resources are
widely used for achieving improved visibility for the plan and the de-
liver areas.


3.3.4. Organizational resources
The review highlights the presence of a high level of internal in-


tegration of the organizational resources to provide increased SCV on
the plan process. It is identified from the literature that the quantifi-
cation of the AFSC evaluations is done for environmental impact studies
using organizational resources (Recanati et al., 2018; Gamboa et al.,
2016). The organizational resources are deployed to evaluate the pre-
ferences of the local products over global products (Schmitt et al.,
2017). It is understood that the information sharing influences the
performance of AFSC, but the supply chain performance depends on
how, and for which purpose the information is used (Kaipia et al.,
2013). Organizational resources are highly utilized for designing sus-
tainable AFSC network design (Allaoui et al., 2017; How and Lam,
2017; Galal and El-Kilany, 2016; Accorsi et al., 2016; Miranda-
Ackerman et al., 2017). Organizational resources are deployed to sup-
port the small farmers for sustainable access (Fayet and Vermeulen,
2014) and the development of alternate food network (Forssell and
Lankoski, 2015; Zanoni and Zavanella, 2012). Assuring the quality of
the food in the supply chain involves data mining resources, which is
considered as an integral part of organizational capabilities (Ting et al.,
2014).


The organizational resources in the source process mostly con-
tribute to addressing the sustainability issues concerning the manage-
ment of multiple tiers of partners. These issues include complexities in
maintaining contractual relationships, lack of transparency on trans-
actions and low involvement of the sub-suppliers in the AFSC (Grimm
et al., 2014). Organizational resources in the make process offer in-
creased SCV by developing a sustainable production system, focused on
reducing the greenhouse emissions (Rebolledo-Leiva et al., 2017) and
increasing the production yield (Jelsma et al., 2017). The organiza-
tional resources enhance the SCV of the deliver process to a great ex-
tent, through AFSC network optimization (Musavi and Bozorgi-Amiri,
2017; Kannan et al., 2014). Organizational resources contribute in re-
ducing food waste, through the development of efficient and innovative
solutions to assure quality and distribution sustainability (Battini et al.,
2016; Validi et al., 2014; Manzini et al., 2014; Kaipia et al., 2013).
Various other strategies such as design and development of short food
supply chain (Aubry and Kebir, 2013), improvement in the food re-
tailing practices (Chkanikova and Mont, 2015) and zero-packing gro-
cery stores (Beitzen-Heineke et al., 2017) are highly reliant on orga-
nizational resources.


3.3.5. Technological resources
Agriculture is considered to be an early adopter of technology for


the attainment of economic and environmental benefits (Heard et al.,
2018). Björnberg et al. (2015) recommend the AFSC's to focus on re-
search and development of emerging technologies for agricultural in-
tensification. Agricultural biotechnology is seen as a potential tool for
increased food production. RFID is found to be a useful technique to
reduce losses in agricultural product transportation (Yan et al., 2015).
Big data is identified as a potential information technology tool in AFSC
(Shukla and Tiwari, 2017; Ahearn et al., 2016). Big data can be used to
understand and satisfy consumer needs by offering the required product
attributes (Ahearn et al., 2016). The significant aspect of an AFSC is the


Table 1
Level of analytics across SCV processes.
Supply chain visibility Analytics


Descriptive Predictive Prescriptive


Plan 42 3 9
Source 5 0 1
Make 3 0 0
Deliver 12 1 8
Total 62 4 18


S.S. Kamble, et al.






ability to retrieve past information that can be used to track the origin
of the products improving the visibility of the plan area (Wognum et al.,
2011). The technological resources are found to support the visibility of
the make process with the use of postharvest technologies (Chimphango
and Görgens, 2015). The technical resources play a significant role in
improving the visibility of the deliver process by providing real-time
data monitoring system (Wang and Yue, 2017). It is expected that au-
tonomous vehicles will transform the supply chain in the future (Heard
et al., 2018). Technological resources are also deployed for developing
cold chain management and inventory control systems, making the
AFSC environmentally sustainable (Yang et al., 2017).


3.3.6. Physical resources
The contribution of the physical resources in enhancing the SCV and


DAC was observed to be higher in the make and the deliver area. Yan
et al. (2015) proposed the concept of the sustainable factory system that
requires less labor, water, nutrition, pesticides, and can be operated in a
controlled environment using artificial light, temperature, humidity,
carbon dioxide, water supply, and cultivation. In the deliver process,
the physical resources contribute in creation of regional and local food
hubs (Berti and Mulligan, 2016), selection of packaging solutions
(Battini et al., 2016), and design of refrigerated automated warehouses
for green food supply chain (Chen et al., 2016; Meneghetti and Monti,
2015).


3.3.7. Human resources
Human resources play a significant role in improving the visibility


of the plan area in AFSCs. The attitudes of human resources and their
support for sustainable development programs are found to be a sig-
nificant component of sustainability orientation (Emamisaleh and
Rahmani, 2017). The views and opinions of the human resources on
different aspects of AFSC such as linking tourism with agriculture
(Thomas-Francois et al., 2017a, 2017b; Sun et al., 2017) and expected
trade-offs of integrated assessment (Gamboa et al., 2016) are highly
significant in the planning process. Further, the interpersonal trust and
working to standards are critical requirements for developing a sus-
tainable local and more conserved AFSC (Smith, 2008). Human re-
sources enhance the visibility improvement of the source area through
the development of collaborations, roundtable and partnerships be-
tween the various stakeholders (Castro and Swart, 2017). In the make
area, human resources contribute to increased visibility through the


development of institutional setup for farmers. It is suggested that small
farmers combine and participate in the supply chains to substantially
increase productivity, thereby contributing to both rural development
and land sparing (Jelsma et al., 2017).


3.3.8. Financial resources
Financial benefits have been one of the primary objective of plan-


ning and designing AFSC networks. However, it is also recommended to
consider carbon or greenhouse emissions instead of relying highly on
costs or level of service (Galal and El-Kilany, 2016; Accorsi et al., 2016).
Companies need to spend more money on achieving more sustainable
solutions, making it necessary for them to attract private investments to
address environmental issues (Rueda et al., 2017). In the source pro-
cess, the benefits of partially guaranteed contracts between the farmers
and the buyers are expected to be a strategy offering mutual benefits to
both the parties (Tang et al., 2016).


3.3.9. Intangible resources
The intangible resources which support improved visibility of the


plan area include the external drivers and influencers that determine
the consumer needs and demands. It is found that the external drivers of
the organizations affect the internal drivers (Emamisaleh and Rahmani,
2017). Consumers and corporations are increasingly interested in
making their AFSC sustainable and reduce the environmental impact of
food, fiber, feed, and fuel production (Thomson et al., 2017; Rohm
et al., 2017). Intangible dimensions, such as high dependence of de-
veloping countries on tourism for economic development, and
strengthening the agriculture and tourism linkages as a strategy to
maximize economic gains is an essential aspect of the studies in sus-
tainable AFSC (Thomas-Francois et al., 2017a, 2017b). The AFSC
should consider the intangible benefits while planning the supply chain
networks to address the socio-economic challenges such as unemploy-
ment, low income, food insecurity, and poverty (Thomas-Francois et al.,
2017a, 2017b). Adoption of big data will be an essential tool for ana-
lyzing consumer demands and responding to them (Ahearn et al.,
2016). The use of intangible resources for the improvement of visibility
in the source process stresses the organizations to push for new in-
itiatives. The literature considers the issue of food safety, traceability of
the agricultural produce, and the consumer willingness to pay more for
traceability of the agricultural products (Sun et al., 2017). Wholesale
auctions, where the consumers can come in direct contact with the


61


18
36


15
7


19


0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70


Fig. 3. Supply chain resources deployed in sustainable AFSC.


Table 2
Supply chain visibility and supply chain resources integration.
Supply chain visibility Supply chain resources


Organizational Technical Physical Human Financial Intangible


Plan 43 11 2 23 6 13
Source 3 1 1 3 3 2
Make 2 2 0 3 0 2
Deliver 13 4 4 7 6 4


S.S. Kamble, et al.






producers need to be explored for the benefit of the alternative food
systems (Johnson et al., 2016).


3.4. Summary of the review findings


3.4.1. Sustainable performance outcomes of AFSC
The review findings reveal that the social performance of the AFSC


is closely linked with the welfare and well-being of the farming and the
rural communities. The farmers will not be able to deliver their best
functioning in poor social conditions. The AFSC performance on social
sustainability dimension is measured on the organization's ability to
develop attractive farming livelihoods, adaptive rural communities,
empower the farmers to build robust rural social infrastructure, ability
to generate employment and youth development. The environmental
sustainability performance of the AFSC is measured on the extent to
which the available natural resources are protected during the pro-
duction, delivery, and consumption of the farm produce. The amount of
GHG emissions, water footprints, energy savings during the production
and consumption process, the quality of food produced and the amount
of food wastage are the critical performance parameters that are con-
sidered. The economic sustainability performance of the AFSC means
that a firm is managed in a way that ensures its long-term profitability.
However, to be economically sustainable, a firm does not have to make
profits every year and may include increased productivity, reduced
operating costs, and higher yield as its objectives.


3.4.2. Supply chain visibility
The findings reveal that information collection and sharing is highly


valuable and beneficial for the AFSC to remain competitive, addressing
the challenges of food perishability, demand-supply variations, safety,
and sustainability. Higher SCV across different SCOR areas help the
organizations to gain visibility on the various planning and operational
aspects of the AFSC, including the network design issues, inventory
status, physical movement of the products, and process visibility. The
review highlights that high SCV helps in improving the DAC and sus-
tainable AFSC performance. However, the performance improvement
depends on how meaningful, useful and quality data is captured and
shared through the SCOR processes. The study further reveals that
various supply chain resources are deployed for improving the SCV and
DAC.


3.4.3. Integrated Supply chain resources
The findings reveal that organizational resources help in collecting


the abundant amount of data, information, and knowledge that is
available as an outcome of the improved visibility in different SCOR
processes. The firms should be able to derive value from these organi-
zational resources. The technological resources refer to the requirement
of advanced data storage systems; RFID and sensor technologies, ERP
systems, and inter-organizational systems. Human resources refer to the
required human skills for performing data analysis and also carrying
out analysis of the data collected from them. For a firm to build cap-
ability on human resources, needs to hire highly skilled data scientists
for analysis and management of the data. Physical resources mainly
refer to the make and delivery process of the SCOR model. It involves
all the physical resources used during the movement of the raw mate-
rials and the goods. Material handling equipment's, transport vehicles,
storage equipment are included. Intangible resources refer to the
quality of interactions and communications with the customers of the
organization. These resources relate to the capability of the firm to
collect information from the customers and use them to develop new
products/services or modify the existing products/services. Financial
performance refers to the final desired outcome of the data analytic
capabilities. These could be short-term financial gains and may have an
impact on the overall economic sustainability of the organization.


3.4.4. Data analytics capability
The integration of supply chain resources and enhanced SCV leads


to improved DAC. It refers to the outcome of the internal integration
that results from a set of interconnected systems and processes facil-
itating the decision-making processes (Schoenherr and Swink, 2012;
Williams et al., 2013). Internal integration mainly involves the com-
bination of data and information systems and is described by the way
the firm “structures its organizational practices, procedures and beha-
viors into collaborative, synchronized and manageable processes”
(Zhao et al., 2011). The data analytic capability is a result of how the
collaboration between different functional areas have occurred in the
firm and how well the various firm's resources are deployed leading to
the alignment of organizational goals and performance outcomes
(Schoenherr and Swink, 2012).


4. Managerial implications and application framework


4.1. Implications from the review findings


The above review findings reveal that different research meth-
odologies and level of analytics that relates to descriptive, predictive
and prescriptive analytics are used in analyzing sustainability issues in
AFSC. More specifically the review confirmed that to achieve sustain-
able performance there is a need to have a high level of SCV and in-
tegration of the firm's resources. The findings identified SCV and supply
chain resources as the antecedents of DAC that leads to sustainable
supply chain performance. It is therefore implied that the organization's
information collection strategy should be based on which sustainable
outcomes are needed to be achieved by the AFSC (Zhu et al., 2018). The
information is generated from different supply chain process namely:
the plan, source, make, deliver and return. The managers should
identify and select those processes that will contribute highly in
achieving sustainable AFSC performance. For example, if the organi-
zation wants to minimize the total carbon footprints of its supply chain,
it would like to analyze the data collected from the make and the de-
livery process that deals with the food processing and transportation
activities. Therefore, the organization would be required to have strong
visibility for these two SCOR areas.


Further, the findings from the review imply that the managers
should evaluate the existing SCV and improve them in case they are not
sufficient to achieve the performance targets. The supply chain re-
sources need to be deployed in such cases to improve the SCV and the
DAC. It is therefore required that the managers should communicate the
significance of attaining high SCV in the development of the DAC to all
its partners and stakeholders in the supply chain. The primary purpose
of having high visibility is to collect and share the data across the AFSC.
However, it is the DAC of the firm that derives the information and
knowledge from the available data. The DAC also requires the use of
different firm's resources viz., organizational, technological, financial,
physical, intangibles and human resources as the information is dis-
persed across the supply chains. Hence, in this study, we call the at-
tention of the managers to integrate all the available resources for
drawing meaningful interpretations from the collected data. The man-
agers should aim at developing strategies, where visibility and resource
integration are aligned with each other. New technological resources
like blockchain may be used for achieving a high level of integration by
the managers for attaining the sustainable objectives for improved
transparency and tracking of the agro-food products in the supply
chain.


Based on the above findings and derived implications we propose an
application framework referred to as data-driven AFSC framework. The
proposed framework will guide the practitioners in deciding the ap-
propriate methodologies, level of analytics, data accuracy, and the use
of proper supply chain resources for developing DAC and improved
sustainable performance. The framework has four main dimensions
namely: SCV, integration of supply chain resources, DAC and


S.S. Kamble, et al.














sustainable performance. In this framework, we conceptualize DAC as
the “the ability to utilize resources to perform analytics task, based on the
interaction between IT assets and other firm resources” (Cosic et al., 2015).
In the absence of the DAC, the organizations will not be in a position to
exploit the SCV benefits to its potential. Schoenherr and Swink (2012)
identify the need for collaboration between the different functional
areas within the firm for alignment with the organization's goal and
improved performance. The collaboration is an outcome of the internal
integration achieved through interconnected systems and processes
facilitating improved decision making. The proposed framework is
presented in Fig. 4.


4.2. The utility of application framework


The performance management system of an AFSC is considered to
be complicated, consisting of the following processes: i) Identifying the
performance measures ii) Target setting iii) Planning iv)
Communication with supply chain partners v) Monitoring the progress
and vi) Reporting and feedback.


The DAC can improve the performance of the SCOR processes if
used and appropriately implemented providing high business value to
the organizations (Trkman et al., 2010). It is therefore required that the
organizations make sufficient investments in developing the DAC. The
investments are needed to be made on the various supply chain re-
sources that will enhance the SCV and DAC. The proposed framework
can help on deciding investments to be made on different supply chain
resources and the visibility dimension to be focused. The DAC includes
data collection, aggregation, analysis and sharing of the information for
the use by the decision makers. The organizations should ensure that
the DAC and the data requirements are aligned, the more complex the
decision to be made, the higher will be the information requirements.
The information visibility is governed by the use and management of
different supply chain resources such as organizational, physical,
technological, financial, and human resources. The organization needs
to identify the supply chain areas (plan, source, make and deliver) from
where the information is to be collected and the extent to which it will
contribute to the AFSCs sustainable outcomes. Any imbalance between
the DAC and SCV (information sources) may not add to the desired
results. When the SCV is poor than expected, the organizations will fail
to meet the performance targets. In contrast, if the organization posses


more than the required SCV, the performance targets are achieved in-
efficiently. Possessing more than the needed SCV may increase the DAC
but attracts high consumption of supply chain resources leading to in-
creased investments.


It is understood that the supply chains have different needs de-
pending upon their maturity levels and hence it is difficult to propose a
generalized solution that may work for all the situations (Cadez and
Guilding, 2008). In our application framework, no single optimal
strategy can be applied for the deployment of supply chain resources.
However, the application framework can guide the AFSCs on identi-
fying the significant SCOR areas that improve the information visibility
and supply chain integration. However, the AFSC's are required to
prioritize their performance outcomes.


Further, we recommend the AFSCs to use the supply chain maturity
model to assess their maturity (de Oliveira et al., 2012). This will help
them to set the performance objectives and also decide in which SCOR
areas the supply chain resources are to be deployed. The supply chain
maturity model is a process-oriented model with information as an
essential driver for success. The description of the different levels of the
supply chain maturity model is presented in Table 3.


de Oliveira et al. (2012) argued that the supply chain maturity level
decides the SCV and data analytics capabilities of an organization Their
study suggests the level wise investments be made for developing BDAC
in the different SCOR areas as shown in Table 4.


The proposed application framework contributes to the literature by
providing a decision-making framework for transforming the tradi-
tional AFSC into a data-driven AFSC with sustainable objectives.


5. Future research directions


The proposed framework and findings from the systematic review
suggest some future directions to capitalize on the research develop-
ment of data-driven sustainable AFSC. These are discussed in this sec-
tion.


5.1. Improving the supply chain visibility


• SCV provides organizations with high availability of data. Getting
access to the data in most of the developing countries is difficult
because of poor infrastructure and high costs associated with the


Fig. 4. Data-driven AFSCM framework.


S.S. Kamble, et al.






data collection procedures. Future studies should focus on how
small farmers in the developing economies should be equipped with
these technologies and how they can be made affordable making
them sustainable. More specifically the future studies in AFSC
should focus on the following aspects aligning with the objectives of
achieving improved agricultural sustainability;
o Developing new forms of advisory and support systems to build
capabilities to use data-driven information, knowledge, skills, and
technology.
o Developing general standards for data collection, sharing, in-
teroperability, accessibility, and accuracy.
o How to promote open technologies for farming and on-farm
processing of farm products as also for data and information.
o Developing strategies for governing the data management and
sharing platforms, ensuring transparency, recognition of owner-
ship and traceability of data.


• Data-driven supply chains promise to bring a radical change in the
transformation of the AFSC, attaining sustainable goals. The ad-
vances in the sensor technologies, computing technologies, and
availability of data offer numerous opportunities for information
sharing and efficient decision making. It is expected that these new
developments, like blockchain, internet of things and big data
technologies will shorten the agricultural supply chains offering
social benefits to the deprived communities. Future studies should
be conducted to investigate how these technologies will benefit the
farming community and which supply chain resources will be re-
quired to attain the same.
• The review reveals that very few financial inclusion initiatives
backed with technological resources are taken up for sustainable
AFSC. Such initiatives will most benefit the remote communities,
who are generally dependent on the agricultural produce for income
generation. In most of the cases, the farmers possess assets that are
not recognized as collateral by the lending institutions. These assets
include livestock, land, and harvests. Future studies should focus on
how these illiquid assets can be brought into the collateral system by
deploying suitable technologies like IoT and Blockchain. Future
studies should also focus on developing new business models and
tools to integrate the governments effectively, farmers, banks, in-
surance companies, market intermediaries, cooperatives, etc. for
data-driven participation in AFSC. Such integrations should provide


scope for interaction among the different stakeholders in the AFSC
with sustainable objectives.


5.2. IoT applications in sustainable AFSC for improved supply chain
visibility


IoT is found to have significant use in reducing food wastage
(Sundmaeker et al., 2010). However, the IoT technologies lack adoption
in emerging economies (Verdouw et al., 2016). Future studies should
focus on identifying the different IoT adoption barriers in AFSCM. Fu-
ture studies may explore the possibilities of implementing IoT in
achieving sustainable AFSC in the following SCOR processes:


• Make process
The following research questions may be investigated:


o To what extent the IoT based technologies can be used for dif-
ferentiating and tracking the raw materials, semi-processed and
finished products?
o How can the RFID tags be used in combination with electronic
product codes for making production processes stable?
• Deliver process
o The studies in this process may focus on evaluating the improve-
ments in carbon footprints with the use of IoT-based technologies.
For example, future studies may focus on the use of GPS for vehicle
tracking and the corresponding benefits it provides to the AFSC to
make it sustainable.
• The implementation of IoT in the AFSC should be aimed at im-
proving sustainable performance. In most of the cases, the data
generated by IoT devices will help to fulfill the customer's require-
ments of transparent, quality and authentic supply chains. These IoT
devices will support in the successful implementation of the block-
chain and the big data technologies providing the AFSC with the
highest level of visibility. Traceability of food products, transpar-
ency, authenticity, and quality of the agro-products in an AFSC will
be highly dependent on the level of SCV that is achieved.
• Further studies will be required to ascertain the data requirements
from the various SCOR processes fulfilling the sustainable perfor-
mance requirement. Future studies should also address evolving


Table 3
Summary of supply chain maturity model.
Level Description


I (Foundation) • Focused on building an underlying structure.• Sourcing is the focus area.
II (Structure) • Distribution and demand planning processes get structured
III (Vision) • Planning, source, make, deliver are viewed distinctly• Focus on the development of cross-functional teams and supply chain integration.
IV (Integration) • Firms focus on establishing long-term collaborative relationships with all their supply chain stakeholders.• Strategic planning team focus on selecting supply chain partners and building long-term relationships with stakeholders
V (Dynamics) • supply chain attains a high level of integration• Firm's take control of demand and capacity constraints by establishing a pull system through the development of a close relationship with customers


Table 4
Investment Strategy and supply chain Maturity Level.
Supply chain Maturity level Investments needed in the following SCOR processes Reasons


Level I Plan, Source and partly Make. • Poorly defined (ad hoc) processes• Focus on planning operations on deciding on which resources to be exploited
Level II Deliver • defined processes• Focus on fulfilling the orders of its customers.
Level III Make • Focus shifts on aligning make process, to supply high-value products and services to


customers.
Level IV and V Source • Focus on cooperation and collaborations with customers and suppliers• Strategic partnership/alliances


S.S. Kamble, et al.






sustainable AFSC performance metrics and measures, as it is ex-
pected that the implementation of IoT technologies will change the
way the AFSC operations are presently performed. In an IoT, based
system data about all the processes in the supply chain will be
captured automatically and in real-time without the interference of
the human element. Studies should focus on how these initiatives
will have an impact on the sustainability dimensions of AFSC.


5.3. Blockchain technology for better integration of supply chain resources


• In agriculture, blockchain based data management can be beneficial
especially around data that relates to land and resource use records,
purchase and use of pesticides and other harmful agents, traceability
and even flows of finance across the whole value chain. The
blockchain is arguably not just a new technology, and not even just
a potentially disruptive technology, it is foundational technology: “It
has the potential to create new foundations for our economic and
social systems.” The blockchain is one of the significant technolo-
gical resources that promote the DAC by providing the AFSC with
technology infrastructure for things like digitization, automation,
and tracking, all of which are essential to drive the farmers' sus-
tainability initiatives.
• The present literature highlights the increasing demand from the
consumers for complete information on the product, reflecting the
need for more transparent and lack of trust in the current AFSC.
Also, there is increasing importance attached to eco-labeling and
supplier certification initiatives for achieving sustainable AFSC.
These initiatives will help the AFSCs to address the issue of in-
creasing cases of fraud and product adulteration. The above pro-
blems if left unaddressed may pose a severe challenge to food se-
curity, food quality, and AFSC sustainability. The present AFSC has
to ensure sustainability at two levels, i.e., physical and digital level.
The digital layer should provide reliable and trustworthy informa-
tion on the origin and provenance of food products in the physical
layer (Ge et al., 2017). Future studies should focus on how block-
chain and other emerging technologies will support the AFSC in
increasing transparency and automated processes. Research studies
are required to focus on how blockchain technology can ensure the
permanence of the records and ensure auditable information sharing
across the different stakeholders in the AFSC (Lin et al., 2017).
• The multinational companies dominate the present AFSCs as they
are the prime buyers in the market. Usually, they decide the prices
and crops to be grown by the farmers in a given season. The lit-
erature identifies initiatives like community farming for shortening
the AFSC. The objective of the community farming is that the farmer
buys a share in the farm and sells the farm produce directly to the
co-operative throughout the year. The two benefits observed from
this arrangement is the financial support provided by the co-op-
erative at the beginning of the season, and the consumers know their
farmers well in advance getting cheaper, seasonal, and locally-
grown produce. Future studies should investigate how the block-
chain in AFSC can address the issues of authority, distribution, and
shareholding in the operation of community-sponsored agriculture.


5.4. Developing big data analytics capability


• Big Data platforms are essential to handle the amount of data gen-
erated by the IoT, which is all the data coming from all the inter-
connected ‘things’ that send data over the Internet. In agriculture, big
data and IoT are currently mainly associated with information col-
lected by sensors, satellites or drones, GIS combined with genomic
details or climate data, which can all help farmers optimize their farm
operations. BDA applications in AFSC is increasing at a faster pace.
BDA is used for smart sensing and monitoring of the farms using
robotics and sensors (Faulkner and Cebul, 2014), for intelligent
analysis and planning by predicting the crop health, yield modeling


(Noyes, 2014) and precision farming (Sun et al., 2013). Big data with
cloud computing technologies uses weather data, yield data soil
types, market information and agricultural data (Wang et al., 2014).
Big data is expected to bring a significant change in the scope and
organization of smart farming (Wolfert et al., 2017) with the devel-
opment of the new technologies like IoT, wirelessly connecting all the
physical systems within a supply chain has become more comfor-
table, providing real-time access to data. Wolfert et al. (2017) identify
the following challenges for adoption of BDA in AFSC.
o Ownership of data and associated privacy and security issues
o Quality of big data
o Availability of skilled human resources for big data analysis
o Sustainable integration of data
o The openness of the platforms


The scope of the present study was to review the data analytics
applications for achieving sustainable performance in AFSC. However,
we have observed that there are very few studies using BDA with the
focus on sustainable AFSC. BDA can contribute significantly in attaining
v AFSC. BDA was used to provide a sustainable supply of farm products
and also higher traceability and transparency to the consumers (Shukla
and Tiwari, 2017; Wang and Yue, 2017). More studies are required to
be conducted with the specific objectives of achieving sustainable
performance in AFSC. Future studies should focus on addressing the
BDA implementation issues identified by Wolfert et al. (2017) while
concentrating on sustainable AFSC.


6. Conclusions and limitations of the study


The present study makes a significant contribution towards the re-
search gaps identified in the literature, providing useful information on
what sustainable performance outcomes are accomplished by a data-
driven AFSC, which supply chain resources are used to develop DAC
and which supply chain processes provide high supply chain informa-
tion visibility. Based on a systematic literature review of 84 research
papers the study advances the literature by providing useful informa-
tion on the above-identified gaps. The review findings reveal that a
data-driven AFSC aims at achieving the social, environmental and
economical sustainable performance outcomes. Our study revealed that
the data in an AFSC is collected from all the four supply chain process
viz., plan, source, make and deliver. However, the plan and deliver
supply chain processes contribute highly in developing DAC, compared
to the source and make process. The AFSC was found to use different
supply chain resources for data collection and analysis. The data-driven
AFSC relied more on organizational and technological resources for
developing the DAC. The study also highlights the increasing role of
human and physical resources in enhancing the SCV. Based on the
findings of the study we propose an application framework that iden-
tifies the SCV and integration of supply chain resources as the main
antecedents in developing a robust DAC, which in turn leads to the
achievement of the sustainable AFSC. The findings from this study may
serve as a foundation for both the researchers and practitioners. The
researchers may like to consider the significant factors presented in the
framework and validate it statistically in different AFSC environments.
The practitioners may focus on developing technologies that will en-
hance SCV and also identify the resources that may contribute towards
strengthening the data analytics capabilities required to attain the
sustainable performance of the AFSC.


The authors recognize that the study has a few limitations. While
the authors have conducted a literature search using the WoS database
to identify the relevant articles, it is possible that some research articles
could have been missed in this review. Additionally, the analysis and
synthesis are based on the authors’ interpretation of the selected arti-
cles. The authors attempted to avoid these issues by cross-checking
papers independently and thus deal with embedded bias, but errors
might have occurred.


S.S. Kamble, et al.






Appendix 1. Journal wise distribution of selected papers


Journal Name No. of Articles


International Journal of Production Economics 11
Sustainability 11
Journal of Cleaner Production 10
Production Planning and Control 3
International Journal of Production Research 3
British Food Journal 3
SCM: An International Journal 2
Journal of Rural Studies 2
Resources Conservation and Recycling 2
Computers in Industrial Engineering 2
Computers and Operations Research 2
Advanced Engineering Informatics 1
Agric Hum Values 1
Agricultural and Env. Letters 1
Agriculture 1
Annals of the American Association of Geographers 1
Annals of Tourism Mgmt. 1
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 1
Chemical Product and Process Modeling 1
Cogent Business and Mgmt. 1
CSR and Env. Mgmt 1
CyTA - Journal of Food 1
European Journal of Operations Research 1
Food Control 1
Food Policy 1
Foods 1
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 1
Int. Bus. Review 1
Int. Food and Agribusiness Mgmt Rev. 1
Int. J. Simul. Model. 1
Journal of Enterprise Mgmt. 1
Journal of Env. Mgmt. 1
Journal of Food Engineering 1
Journal of Industrial Ecology 1
Land Use Policy 1
Landscape and Urban Planning 1
Metalurgia Int. 1
Packing Tech. and Sci. 1
Royal Soc. B: Biological Sciences 1
Rural Sociology 1
Science of the Total Environment 1
Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering 1
Sustainable Development 1
Tourism Planning and Development 1
Total 84


Appendix II. Systematic Literature Review


Author Research Approach Level of Data Analytics SC Visibility Type of Sustainability SC Resources


Soc Eco Env Org Tec Hum Fin Phy Int


Recanati et al. (2018) ECS DS P ✓ ✓
Kiil et al. (2017) ECS DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Allaoui et al. (2017) C PS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Miranda-Ackerman and Azzaro-Pantel (2017) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
How and Lam (2017) ECS PS P ✓
Castro and Swart (2017) C DS S ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Musavi and Bozorgi-Amiri (2017) C PS D ✓ ✓
Schmitt et al. (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Jelsma et al. (2017) ES DS M ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Emamisaleh and Rahmani (2017) ES DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Thomas-Francois et al., (2017a, 2017b) ES DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Sun et al. (2017) ES DS S ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Gaitán-Cremaschi et al. (2016) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Gold et al. (2017) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Wang and Yue (2017) ECS PD P ✓ ✓ ✓
Shukla and Tiwari (2017) C DS M ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Hadiguna and Tjahjono (2017) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Giuggioli et al., (2016) ECS PD D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Thomas-Francois et al., (2017a, 2017b) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Sgarbossa and Russo (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓
Chiffoleau et al. (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓


S.S. Kamble, et al.






Doernberg et al. (2016) ES DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Giampietri et al. (2016) ES DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Chen et al. (2016) ECS DS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Tang et al. (2016) C DS S ✓ ✓ ✓
Ely et al. (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Galal and El-Kilany (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Berti and Mulligan (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Derqui et al. (2016) ES DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Gamboa et al. (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Johnson et al. (2016) ES DS S ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Accorsi et al. (2016) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Irani and Sharif (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Battini et al. (2016) ECS DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Meneghetti and Monti (2015) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Tsuchiya et al., (2015) ES DS P ✓ ✓
Peano et al. (2015) ECS DS ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Björnberg et al. (2015) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Chkanikova and Mont (2015) C DS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Yan et al. (2015) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Forssell and Lankoski (2015) C DS P ✓ ✓
Chimphango and Görgens (2015) ECS DS M ✓ ✓
Fayet and Vermeulen (2014) ES DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Kannan et al. (2014) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Validi et al. (2014) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Bourlakis et al. (2014) ES PD P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Beske et al. (2014) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Ting et al. (2014) ECS DS D ✓
Gold et al. (2013) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Aubry and Kebir (2013) ECS DS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Kaipia et al. (2013) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Zanoni and Zavanella (2012) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Yakovleva et al. (2012) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Cojocariu (2012) C DS D ✓ ✓
Smith (2008) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Ilbery and Maye (2005) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Kannan (2018) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Banaeian et al. (2018) ECS PS S ✓ ✓
Yang et al. (2017) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Miranda-Ackerman et al. (2017) ECS PS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Rueda et al. (2017) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Beitzen-Heineke et al. (2017) ES DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Xia et al. (2016) ECS DS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Wang et al., (2016a, 2016b) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Dania et al. (2018) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Heard et al. (2018) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Thomson et al. (2017) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Rohm et al. (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
León-Bravo et al. (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Kirwan et al. (2017) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Garofalo et al. (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓
Freidberg (2017) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Tasca et al. (2017) ECS DS P ✓ ✓
Akhtar et al. (2016) ES PD P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Manning and Soon (2016) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Ahearn et al. (2016) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓
Bloom (2015) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Grimm et al. (2014) ES DS S ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Darkow et al. (2015) ES DS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Manzini et al. (2014) ECS PS D ✓ ✓ ✓
Egilmez et al. (2014) ECS PS P ✓ ✓
Van Der Vorst et al. (2009) ES DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Hamprecht et al. (2005) ECS DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Wognum et al. (2011) C DS P ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓


C: Conceptual, D: Deliver, DS: Descriptive, Eco: Economical, ECS: Empirical-case study, Env: Environmental, ES: Empirical survey, Fin: Financial, Hum: Human, Int:
Intangibles, M: Make, Org: Organizational, P: Plan, PD: Predictive, Phy: Physical, PS: Prescriptive, S: Source, Soc: Social, Tec: Technological.


References


Accorsi, R., Cholette, S., Manzini, R., Pini, C., Penazzi, S., 2016. The land-network pro-
blem: ecosystem carbon balance in planning sustainable agro-food supply chains. J.
Clean. Prod. 112, 158–171.


Ahearn, M.C., Armbruster, W., Young, R., 2016. Big data's potential to improve food
supply chain environmental sustainability and food safety. Int. Food Agribus. Manag.
Rev. 19 (A).


Ahoa, E., Kassahun, A., Tekinerdogan, B., 2018. July). Configuring supply chain business
processes using the SCOR reference model. In: International Symposium on Business
Modeling and Software Design. Springer, Cham, pp. 338–351.


Ahumada, O., Villalobos, J.R., 2009. Application of planning models in the agri-food
supply chain: a review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 196 (1), 1–20.


Akhtar, P., Tse, Y.K., Khan, Z., Rao-Nicholson, R., 2016. Data-driven and adaptive lea-
dership contributing to sustainability: global agri-food supply chains connected with
emerging markets. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 181, 392–401.


Allaoui, H., Guo, Y.H., Choudhary, A., Bloemhof, J., 2017. Sustainable agro-food supply
chain design using two-stage hybrid multi-objective decision-making approach.
Comput. Oper. Res. 89, 369–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2016.10.01.


Amit, R., Schoemaker, P.J.H., 1993. Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strat.
Manag. J. 14, 33–46.


Arunachalam, D., Kumar, N., Kawalek, J.P., 2018. Understanding big data analytics
capabilities in supply chain management: unravelling the issues, challenges and


S.S. Kamble, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref5

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2016.10.01

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref8




implications for practice. Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 114, 416–436.
Aubry, C., Kebir, L., 2013. Shortening food supply chains: a means for maintaining


agriculture close to urban areas? The case of the French metropolitan area of Paris.
Food Policy 41, 85–93.


Bailey, J., Pearson, S., 1983. Development of a tool for measuring and analyzing com-
puter user satisfaction. Manag. Sci. 29 (5), 530–545.


Banaeian, N., Mobli, H., Fahimnia, B., Nielsen, I.E., Omid, M., 2018. Green supplier se-
lection using fuzzy group decision making methods: a case study from the agri-food
industry. Comput. Oper. Res. 89, 337–347.


Barbosa, M.W., Vicente, A., Ladeira, M.B., Oliveira, M.P., 2017. Managing supply chain
resources with Big Data Analytics: a systematic review. International Journal of
Logistics Research and Applications 1–24.


Barney, J.B., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manag. 17
(1), 99–120.


Barratt, M., Barratt, R., 2011. Exploring internal and external supply chain linkages:
evidence from the field. J. Oper. Manag. 29 (5), 514–528.


Barratt, M., Oke, A., 2007. Antecedents of supply chain visibility in retail supply chains: a
resource-based theory perspective. J. Oper. Manag. 25 (6), 1217–1233.


Battini, D., Calzavara, M., Persona, A., Sgarbossa, F., 2016. Sustainable packaging de-
velopment for fresh food supply chains. Packag. Technol. Sci. 29 (1), 25–43.


Beitzen-Heineke, E.F., Balta-Ozkan, N., Reefke, H., 2017. The prospects of zero-packaging
grocery stores to improve the social and environmental impacts of the food supply
chain. J. Clean. Prod. 140, 1528–1541.


Berti, G., Mulligan, C., 2016. Competitiveness of small farms and innovative food supply
chains: the role of food hubs in creating sustainable regional and local food systems.
Sustainability 8 (7), 616.


Beske, P., Land, A., Seuring, S., 2014. Sustainable supply chain management practices and
dynamic capabilities in the food industry: a critical analysis of the literature. Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 152, 131–143.


Björnberg, K.E., Jonas, E., Marstorp, H., Tidåker, P., 2015. The role of biotechnology in
sustainable agriculture: views and perceptions among key actors in the Swedish food
supply chain. Sustainability 7 (6), 7512–7529.


Bloom, J.D., 2015. Standards for development: food safety and sustainability in wal‐-
mart's Honduran produce supply chains. Rural Sociol. 80 (2), 198–227.


Bourlakis, M., Maglaras, G., Aktas, E., Gallear, D., Fotopoulos, C., 2014. Firm size and
sustainable performance in food supply chains: insights from Greek SMEs. Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 152, 112–130.


Braganza, A., Brooks, L., Nepelski, D., Ali, M., Moro, R., 2017. Resource management in
big data initiatives: processes and dynamic capabilities. J. Bus. Res. 70, 328–337.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.006.


Bronson, K., Knezevic, I., 2016. Big Data in food and agriculture. Big Data & Society 3 (1)
2053951716648174.


Cadez, S., Guilding, C., 2008. An exploratory investigation of an integrated contingency
model of strategic management accounting. Account. Org. Soc. 33 (7–8), 836–863.


Castro, N.R., Swart, J., 2017. Building a roundtable for a sustainable hazelnut supply
chain. J. Clean. Prod. 168, 1398–1412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.
239.


Chadegani, A.A., Salehi, H., Yunus, M., et al., 2013. A comparison between two main
academic literature collections: web of science and scopus databases. Asian Soc. Sci. 9
(5). https://doi.org/10.5539/ass.v9n5p18.


Charles, H., Godfray, J., Beddington, J.R., Crute, I.R., Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., Muir,
J.F., Pretty, J., et al., 2010. Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion people.
Science 327 (5967), 812.


Chen, D.M., Tucker, B., Badami, M.G., Ramankutty, N., Rhemtulla, J.M., 2016. A multi-
dimensional metric for facilitating sustainable food choices in campus cafeterias. J.
Clean. Prod. 135, 1351–1362.


Chiffoleau, Y., Millet-Amrani, S., Canard, A., 2016. From short food supply chains to
sustainable agriculture in urban food systems: food democracy as a vector of tran-
sition. Agriculture 6 (4), 57.


Chimphango, A.F., Görgens, J.F., 2015. Postharvest technology for advancing sustainable
bioenergy production for food processing. Br. Food J. 117 (12), 2850–2862.


Chkanikova, O., Mont, O., 2015. Corporate supply chain responsibility: drivers and bar-
riers for sustainable food retailing. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag. 22 (2),
65–82.


Cojocariu, C.R., 2012. A sustainable food supply chain: green logistics. Metalurgia
International 17 (3), 205–207.


Correia, E., Carvalho, H., Azevedo, S.G., Govindan, K., 2017. Maturity models in supply
chain sustainability: a systematic literature review. Sustainability 9 (1), 64.


Cosic, R., Shanks, G., Maynard, S., 2015. A business analytics capability framework.
Australasian Journal of Information Systems 19, 5–19.


Dania, W.A.P., Xing, K., Amer, Y., 2018. Collaboration behavioural factors for sustainable
agri-food supply chains: a systematic review. J. Clean. Prod. 186, 851–864.


Darkow, I.L., Foerster, B., von der Gracht, H.A., 2015. Sustainability in food service
supply chains: future expectations from European industry experts toward the en-
vironmental perspective. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 20 (2), 163–178.


de Oliveira, M.P.V., McCormack, K., Trkman, P., 2012. Business analytics in supply
chains–The contingent effect of business process maturity. Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (5),
5488–5498.


Delen, D., Demirkan, H., 2013. Data, information and analytics as services. Decis. Support
Syst. 55 (1), 359–363.


Dentoni, D., Peterson, H.C., 2011. Multi-stakeholder sustainability alliances in agri-food
chains: a framework for multi-disciplinary research. Int. Food Agribus. Manag. Rev.
14 (5), 83–108.


Derqui, B., Fayos, T., Fernandez, V., 2016. Towards a more sustainable food supply chain:
opening up invisible waste in food service. Sustainability 8 (7), 693.


Dobon, A., Cordero, P., Kreft, F., Østergaard, S.R., Antvorskov, H., Robertsson, M.,, et al.,


2011a. The sustainability of communicative packaging concepts in the food supply
chain. A case study: part 2. Life cycle costing and sustainability assessment. Int. J. Life
Cycle Assess. 16 (6), 537–547.


Dobon, A., Cordero, P., Kreft, F., Østergaard, S.R., Robertsson, M., Smolander, M., Hortal,
M., 2011b. The sustainability of communicative packaging concepts in the food
supply chain. A case study: part 1. Life cycle assessment. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 16
(2), 168–177.


Doernberg, A., Zasada, I., Bruszewska, K., Skoczowski, B., Piorr, A., 2016. Potentials and
limitations of regional organic food supply: a qualitative analysis of two food chain
types in the Berlin metropolitan region. Sustainability 8 (11), 1125.


Donald, B., 2008. Food systems planning and sustainable cities and regions: the role of the
firm in sustainable food capitalism. Reg. Stud. 42, 1251–1262.


Egilmez, G., Kucukvar, M., Tatari, O., Bhutta, M.K.S., 2014a. Supply chain sustainability
assessment of the US food manufacturing sectors: a life cycle-based frontier approach.
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 82, 8–20.


Elkington, J., 1998. Partnerships from cannibals with forks: the triple bottom line of
21st‐century business. Environ. Qual. Manag. 8 (1), 37–51.


Ely, A., Geall, S., Song, Y., 2016. Sustainable maize production and consumption in China:
practices and politics in transition. J. Clean. Prod. 134, 259–268.


Emamisaleh, K., Rahmani, K., 2017. Sustainable supply chain in food industries: drivers
and strategic sustainability orientation. Cogent Business & Management 4 (1),
1345296.


Faulkner, A., Cebul, K., 2014. Agriculture Gets Smart: the Rise of Data and Robotics,
Cleantech Agriculture Report. Cleantech Group.


Fayet, L., Vermeulen, W.J., 2014. Supporting smallholders to access sustainable supply
chains: lessons from the Indian cotton supply chain. Sustain. Dev. 22 (5), 289–310.


Forssell, S., Lankoski, L., 2015. The sustainability promise of alternative food networks:
an examination through “alternative” characteristics. Agric. Hum. Val. 32 (1), 63–75.


Freidberg, S., 2017. Big food and little data: the slow harvest of corporate food supply
chain sustainability initiatives. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 107 (6), 1389–1406.


Gaitán-Cremaschi, D., Kamali, F.P., van Evert, F.K., Meuwissen, M.P., Lansink, A.G.O.,
2015. Benchmarking the sustainability performance of the Brazilian non-GM and GM
soybean meal chains: an indicator-based approach. Food Policy 55, 22–32.


Govindan, K., 2018. Sustainable consumption and production in the food supply chain: a
conceptual framework. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 195, 419–431.


Galal, N.M., El-Kilany, K.S., 2016. Sustainable agri-food supply chain with uncertain
demand and lead time. Int. J. Simul. Model. 3, 485–496.


Gamboa, G., Kovacic, Z., Di Masso, M., Mingorría, S., Gomiero, T., Rivera-Ferré, M.,
Giampietro, M., 2016a. The complexity of food systems: defining relevant attributes
and indicators for the evaluation of food supply chains in Spain. Sustainability 8 (6),
515.


Gao, D., Xu, Z., Ruan, Y.Z., Lu, H., 2016. From a systematic literature review to integrated
definition for sustainable supply chain innovation (SSCI). J. Clean. Prod. 142 (4),
1518–1538.


Garofalo, P., D'Andrea, L., Tomaiuolo, M., Venezia, A., Castrignanò, A., 2017a.
Environmental sustainability of agri-food supply chains in Italy: the case of the
whole-peeled tomato production under life cycle assessment methodology. J. Food
Eng. 200, 1–12.


Ge, L., Brewster, C., Spek, J., Smeenk, A., Top, J., van Diepen, F., et al., 2017. Blockchain
For Agriculture and Food(No. 2017-112). Wageningen Economic Research.


Giampietri, E., Koemle, D., Yu, X., Finco, A., 2016. Consumers' sense of farmers' markets:
tasting sustainability or just purchasing food? Sustainability 8 (11), 1157.


Gold, S., Hahn, R., Seuring, S., 2013. Sustainable supply chain management in “Base of
the Pyramid” food projects—a path to triple bottom line approaches for multi-
nationals? Int. Bus. Rev. 22 (5), 784–799.


Gold, S., Kunz, N., Reiner, G., 2017. Sustainable global agrifood supply chains: exploring
the barriers. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 (2), 249–260.


Grant, R.M., 1991. The resource-based theory of competitive advantage: implications for
strategy formulation. Calif. Manag. Rev. 33 (3), 114–135.


Grimm, J.H., Hofstetter, J.S., Sarkis, J., 2014. Critical factors for sub-supplier manage-
ment: a sustainable food supply chains perspective. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 152, 159–173.


Giuggioli, N.R., Girgenti, V., Briano, R., Peano, C., 2017. Sustainable supply-chain: evo-
lution of the quality characteristics of strawberries stored in green film packaging.
CyTA-J. Food. 15 (2), 211–219.


Gupta, M., George, J.F., 2016. Toward the development of a big data analytics capability.
Inf. Manag. 53 (8), 1049–1064. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.07.004.


Gustin, C.M., Daugherty, P.J., Stank, T.P., 1995. The effects of information availability on
logistics integration. J. Bus. Logist. 16 (1), 1–21.


Hadiguna, R.A., Tjahjono, B., 2017. A framework for managing sustainable palm oil
supply chain operations: a case of Indonesia. Prod. Plann. Contr. 28 (13), 1093–1106.


Hamprecht, J., Corsten, D., Noll, M., Meier, E., 2005. Controlling the sustainability of
food supply chains. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 10 (1), 7–10.


How, B.S., Lam, H.L., 2017. Integrated palm biomass supply chain toward sustainable
management. Chem. Prod. Process Model. 12 (4). https://doi.org/10.1515/cppm-
2017-0024.


Hashem, I.A.T., Yaqoob, I., Anuar, N.B., Mokhtar, S., Gani, A., Khan, S.U., 2015. The rise
of “big data” on cloud computing: review and open research issues. Inf. Syst. 47,
98–115.


Heard, B.R., Taiebat, M., Xu, M., Miller, S.A., 2018. Sustainability implications of con-
nected and autonomous vehicles for the food supply chain. Resour. Conserv. Recycl.
128, 22–24.


Hossain, M., Jahan, R., 2015. Assessing Bangladesh rice supply chain through SCOR
modelling frame for planning effective integration of public and private actors.
International Journal of Automation and Logistics 1 (4), 320–342.


Huang, S.H., Sheoran, S.K., Keskar, H., 2005. Computer-assisted supply chain config-
uration based on supply chain operations reference (SCOR) model. Comput. Ind. Eng.


S.S. Kamble, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref16

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref17

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref19

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref20

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref21

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref22

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref22

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.006

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref24

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref25

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref25

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.239

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.239

https://doi.org/10.5539/ass.v9n5p18

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref28

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref29

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref30

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref31

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref32

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref33

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref34

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref35

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref36

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref37

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref38

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref39

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref40

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref41

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref42

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref43

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref44

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref45

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref46

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref48

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref49

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref50

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref51

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref52

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref53

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref54

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref55

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref200

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref56

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref57

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref59

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref60

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref62

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref63

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref64

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref65

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref66

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref67

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref202

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref202

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref202

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.07.004

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref69

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref70

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref71

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref71

https://doi.org/10.1515/cppm-2017-0024

https://doi.org/10.1515/cppm-2017-0024

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref72

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref73

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref74

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref75




8 (2), 377–394.
Hwang, Y.D., Lin, Y.C., Lyu Jr., J., 2008. The performance evaluation of SCOR sourcing


process—the case study of Taiwan's TFT-LCD industry. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 115 (2),
411–423.


Ilbery, B., Maye, D., 2005. Food supply chains and sustainability: evidence from specialist
food producers in the Scottish/English borders. Land Use Policy 22 (4), 331–344.


Irani, Z., Sharif, A.M., 2016. Sustainable food security futures: perspectives on food waste
and information across the food supply chain. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 29 (2), 171–178.


Jauch, L., Osborn, R., Martin, T., 1980. Structured content analysis of cases: a com-
plementary method for organizational research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 5 (4), 517–525.


Jelsma, I., Slingerland, M., Giller, K.E., Bijman, J., 2017. Collective action in a small-
holder oil palm production system in Indonesia: the key to sustainable and inclusive
smallholder palm oil? J. Rural Stud. 54, 198–210.


Johnson, R., Fraser, E.D., Hawkins, R., 2016. Overcoming barriers to scaling up sus-
tainable alternative food systems: a comparative case study of two ontario-based
wholesale produce auctions. Sustainability 8 (4), 328.


Kaipia, R., Dukovska-Popovska, I., Loikkanen, L., 2013. Creating sustainable fresh food
supply chains through waste reduction. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 43 (3),
262–276.


Kamble, S.S., Gunasekaran, A., Gawankar, S.A., 2018. Sustainable Industry 4.0 frame-
work: a systematic literature review identifying the current trends and future per-
spectives. Process Saf. Environ. Protect. 117, 408–425.


Kannan, G., 2018. Sustainable consumption and production in the food supply chain: a
conceptual framework. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 195, 419–431.


Kannan, G., Jafarian, A., Khodaverdi, R., Devika, K., 2014. Two-echelon multiple-vehicle
location–routing problem with time windows for optimization of sustainable supply
chain network of perishable food. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 152, 9–28.


Kasi, V., 2005. Systemic assessment of SCOR for modeling supply chains. In: System
Sciences, 2005. HICSS'05. Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on. IEEE 87b-87b. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2005.574 At:.


Kiil, K., Dreyer, H.C., Hvolby, H.H., Chabada, L., 2017. Sustainable food supply chains:
the impact of automatic replenishment in grocery stores. Prod. Plann. Contr. 29 (2),
106–116. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1384077.


Kirwan, J., Maye, D., Brunori, G., 2017. Acknowledging complexity in food supply chains
when assessing their performance and sustainability. J. Rural Stud. 52, 21–32.


Krystallis, A., Arvanitoyannis, I.S., 2006. Investigating the concept of meat quality from
the consumers' perspective: the case of Greece. Meat Sci. 72 (1), 164–176.


León-Bravo, V., Caniato, F., Caridi, M., Johnsen, T., 2017a. Collaboration for sustain-
ability in the food supply chain: a multi-stage study in Italy. Sustainability 9 (7),
1253.


Lianguang, M., 2014. January). Study on supply-chain of agricultural products based on
IOT. In: Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation (ICMTMA), 2014 Sixth
International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 627–631.


Lin, Y.P., Petway, J.R., Anthony, J., Mukhtar, H., Liao, S.W., Chou, C.F., Ho, Y.F., 2017.
Blockchain: the evolutionary next step for ICT e-agriculture. Environments 4 (3), 50.


Luthra, S., Mangla, S.K., Chan, F.T., Venkatesh, V.G., 2018. Evaluating the drivers to
information and communication technology for effective sustainability initiatives in
supply chains. Int. J. Inf. Technol. Decis. Mak. 17 (01), 311–338.


Manikas, I., Sundarakani, B., John, J., 2017. Analysis of Operational Efficiency of a Meat
Processing Supply Chain: A Case Study from the UAE.


Manning, L., Soon, J.M., 2016. Development of sustainability indicator scoring (SIS) for
the food supply chain. Br. Food J. 118 (9), 2097–2125.


Manzini, R., Accorsi, R., Ayyad, Z., Bendini, A., Bortolini, M., Gamberi, M.,, et al., 2014.
Sustainability and quality in the food supply chain. A case study of shipment of edible
oils. Br. Food J. 116 (12), 2069–2090.


Mayring, P., 2003. Qualitative Content Analysis. Beltz Verlag, Weinheim, Germany.
Meneghetti, A., Monti, L., 2015. Greening the food supply chain: an optimisation model


for sustainable design of refrigerated automated warehouses. Int. J. Prod. Res. 53
(21), 6567–6587.


Miranda-Ackerman, M.A., Azzaro-Pantel, C., Aguilar-Lasserre, A.A., 2017. A green supply
chain network design framework for the processed food industry: application to the
orange juice agrofood cluster. Comput. Ind. Eng. 109, 369–389.


Miranda-Ackerman, M.A., Azzaro-Pantel, C., 2017. Extending the scope of eco-labelling in
the food industry to drive change beyond sustainable agriculture practices. J.
Environ. Manag. 204, 814–824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.05.02.


Mohr, J., Sohi, R.S., 1995. Communication flows in distribution channels: impact on
assessments of communication quality and satisfaction. J. Retail. 71 (4), 393–416.


Musavi, M., Bozorgi-Amiri, A., 2017. A multi-objective sustainable hub location-sche-
duling problem for perishable food supply chain. Comput. Ind. Eng. 113, 766–778.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.07.039.


Naik, G., Suresh, D.N., 2018. Challenges of creating sustainable agri-retail supply chains.
In: IIMB Management Review, . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iimb.2018.04.001.


Network, G.F., 2012. World Footprint: Do We Fit on the Planet. http://www.
footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/world_footprint.


Nguyen, T., Zhou, L., Spiegler, V., Ieromonachou, P., Yong, L., 2017. A Big data analytics
in supply chain management: a state-of-the-art literature review. Comput. Oper. Res.
1–11.


Noyes, K., 2014. Big Data Poised to Change the Face of Agriculture. Fortune Data. http://
fortune.com/2014/05/30/cropping-up-on-every-farm-big-data-technology/,
Accessed date: 30 May 2018.


Ntabe, E.N., LeBel, L., Munson, A.D., Santa-Eulalia, L.A., 2015. A systematic literature
review of the supply chain operations reference (SCOR) model application with
special attention to environmental issues. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 169, 310–332.


Peano, C., Tecco, N., Dansero, E., Girgenti, V., Sottile, F., 2015. Evaluating the sustain-
ability in complex agri-food systems: the SAEMETH framework. Sustainability 7 (6),
6721–6741.


Peña-Orozco, D.L., Rivera, L., 2017. Sensitivity analysis of the scor metrics selected for
the measurement of the management of a fruit-growing supply chain. Dyna 84 (203),
306–315.


Penrose, E.T., 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Wiley, New York, NY.
Persson, F., 2011. SCOR template—a simulation based dynamic supply chain analysis


tool. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 131 (1), 288–294.
Peteraf, M., 1993. The cornerstones of competitive advantage: a resource-based view.


Strat. Manag. J. 14, 179–192.
Porter, M.E., Heppelmann, J.E., 2014. How Smart Connected Objects Are Transforming


Competition. Harvard Business Review (November).
Potts, J., Lynch, M., Wilkings, A., Hupp_e, G., Cunningham, M., Voora, V., 2014. The Sate


of Sustainability Initiatives Review 2014: Standards and the Green Economy.
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) and the International
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).


Ramos, E., Espichan, K., Todriguez, K., Lo, W., Wu, Z., 2018. Blueberry supply chain in
Peru: planning, integration and execution. Int. J. Supply Chain Manag. 7 (2), 1–12
2018.


Rebolledo-Leiva, R., Angulo-Meza, L., Iriarte, A., Gonzalez-Araya, M.C., 2017. Joint
carbon footprint assessment and data envelopment analysis for the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture production. Sci. Total Environ. 593, 36–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.03.147.


Recanati, F., Marveggio, D., Dotelli, G., 2018. From beans to bar: a life cycle assessment
towards sustainable chocolate supply chain. Sci. Total Environ. 613, 1013–1023.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.187.


Reefke, H., Ahmed, M.D., Sundaram, D., 2014. Sustainable supply chain manage-
ment—decision making and support: the SSCM maturity model and system. Glob.
Bus. Rev. 15 (4_Suppl. l), 1S–12S.


Rohm, H., Oostindjer, M., AFSChemann-Witzel, J., Symmank, C., L Almli, V., de Hooge,
I.E., et al., 2017. Consumers in a sustainable food supply chain (COSUS): under-
standing consumer behavior to encourage food waste reduction. Foods 6 (12), 104.


Rueda, X., Garrett, R.D., Lambin, E.F., 2017. Corporate investments in supply chain
sustainability: selecting instruments in the agri-food industry. J. Clean. Prod. 142,
2480–2492.


Rungtusanatham, M., Salvador, F., Forza, C., Choi, T.Y., 2003. Supply-chain linkages and
operational performance: a resource based perspective. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 23,
1084–1099.


Saguy, I.S., Singh, R.P., Johnson, T., Fryer, P.J., Sastry, S.K., 2013. Challenges facing food
engineering. J. Food Eng. 119 (2), 332–342.


Schmitt, E., Keech, D., Maye, D., Barjolle, D., Kirwan, J., 2016. Comparing the sustain-
ability of local and global food chains: a case study of cheese products in Switzerland
and the UK. Sustainability 8 (5), 419.


Schmitt, E., Galli, F., Menozzi, D., Maye, D., Touzard, J.M., Marescotti, A., Six, J., Brunori,
G., 2017. Comparing the sustainability of local and global food products in Europe. J.
Clean. Prod. 165, 346–359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.07.039.


Schoenthaler, R., 2003. Creating real-time supply chain visibility. Electron. Bus. 29 (8)
12-12.


Seuring, S., Gold, S., 2012. Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in supply
chain management. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 17 (5), 544–555.


Seuring, S., Müller, M., 2008. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. J. Clean. Prod. 16, 1699–1710.


Sgarbossa, F., Russo, I., 2017. A proactive model in sustainable food supply chain: insight
from a case study. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 183, 596–606.


Schoenherr, T., Swink, M., 2012. Revisiting the arcs of integration: cross-validations and
extensions. J. Oper. Manag. 30 (1-2), 99–115.


Sharma, R., Kamble, S.S., Gunasekaran, A., 2018. Big GIS analytics framework for agri-
culture supply chains: a literature review identifying the current trends and future
perspectives. Comput. Electron. Agric. 155, 103–120.


Shukla, M., Tiwari, M.K., 2017. Big-data analytics framework for incorporating small-
holders in sustainable palm oil production. Prod. Plann. Contr. 28 (16), 1365–1377.


Smith, B.G., 2008. Developing sustainable food supply chains. Phil. Trans. Biol. Sci. 363
(1492), 849–861.


Sun, S., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., 2017. Sustainable traceability in the food supply chain: the
impact of consumer willingness to pay. Sustainability 9 (6), 999.


Sun, Z., Du, K., Zheng, F., Yin, S., 2013. Perspectives of research and application of Big
Data on smart agriculture. J. Agric. Sci. Technol. 15, 63–71.


Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., Woelffl_E, S., 2010. Vision and Challenges for
Realizing the Internet of Things. European Union, Brussels.


Supply Chain Council, 2010. Supply Chain Operations Reference Model SCOR Version
10.0. The supply chain council, Inc. SCOR: the supply chain reference0-615-20259-4
(binder).


Supply Chain Council, 2008. Introduction to GreenSCOR: introducing environmental
considerations to the CSOR model. In: Proceedings of the North America Conference
and Exposition March, pp. 17–19.


Tang, C.S., Sodhi, M.S., Formentini, M., 2016. An analysis of partially-guaranteed-price
contracts between farmers and agri-food companies. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 254 (3),
1063–1073.


Tasca, A.L., Nessi, S., Rigamonti, L., 2017. Environmental sustainability of agri-food
supply chains: an LCA comparison between two alternative forms of production and
distribution of endive in northern Italy. J. Clean. Prod. 140, 725–741.


Thomas-Francois, K., von Massow, M., Joppe, M., 2017a. Service-oriented, sustainable,
local food value chain–A case study. Ann. Tourism Res. 65, 83–96.


Thomas-Francois, K., Von Massow, M., Joppe, M., 2017b. Strengthening farmers–hotel
supply chain relationships: a service management approach. Tourism Planning &
Development 14 (2), 198–219.


Tsuchiya, K., Hara, Y., Thaitakoo, D., 2015. Linking food and land systems for sustainable
peri-urban agriculture in Bangkok metropolitan region. Landsc. Urban Plan. 43,


S.S. Kamble, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref75

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref76

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref77

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref78

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref79

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref80

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref81

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref82

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref83

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref84

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref85

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref85

https://doi.org/10.1109/%20HICSS.2005.574

https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1384077

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref88

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref89

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref89

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref90

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref93

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref94

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref95

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref96

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref96

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref97

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref98

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref99

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref100

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref101

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref101

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.05.02

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref103

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref103

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.07.039

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iimb.2018.04.001

http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/world_footprint

http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/world_footprint

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref107

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref107

http://fortune.com/2014/05/30/cropping-up-on-every-farm-big-data-technology/

http://fortune.com/2014/05/30/cropping-up-on-every-farm-big-data-technology/

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref109

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref110

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref111

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref112

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref113

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref114

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref115

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref116

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref117

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref117

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref117

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.03.147

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.187

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref120

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref121

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref122

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref122

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref122

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref123

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref123

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref123

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref124

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref124

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref126

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref126

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref126

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.07.039

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref128

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref128

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref129

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref129

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref130

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref131

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref131

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref204

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref204

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref132

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref132

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref132

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref133

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref133

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref134

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref134

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref135

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref136

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref136

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref137

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref137

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref138

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref138

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref138

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref139

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref139

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref139

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref140

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref141

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref141

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref141

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref142

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref142

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref143

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref143

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref143

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref201

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref201




192–204.
Thomson, A.M., Ramsey, S., Barnes, E., Basso, B., Eve, M., Gennet, S., Spevak, E., 2017.


Science in the supply chain: collaboration opportunities for advancing sustainable
agriculture in the United States. Agricultural & Environmental Letters 2 (1).


Ting, S.L., Tse, Y.K., Ho, G.T.S., Chung, S.H., Pang, G., 2014. Mining logistics data to
assure the quality in a sustainable food supply chain: a case in the red wine industry.
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 152, 200–209.


Trkman, P., McCormack, K., De Oliveira, M.P.V., Ladeira, M.B., 2010. The impact of
business analytics on supply chain performance. Decis. Support Syst. 49 (3),
318–327.


Validi, S., Bhattacharya, A., Byrne, P.J., 2014. A case analysis of a sustainable food supply
chain distribution system—a multi-objective approach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 152,
71–87.


Van Der Vorst, J.G., Tromp, S.O., Zee, D.J.V.D., 2009. Simulation modelling for food
supply chain redesign; integrated decision making on product quality, sustainability
and logistics. Int. J. Prod. Res. 47 (23), 6611–6631.


Van Huijstee, M.M., Francken, M., Leroy, P., 2007. Partnerships for sustainable devel-
opment: a review of current literature. Environ. Sci. 75–89.


Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., Reijers, H.A., Van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., 2015. A control
model for object virtualization in Supply chain management. Comput. Ind. 68,
116–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2014.12.011.


Verdouw, C.N., Beulens, A.J.M., van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., 2013. Virtualisation of flor-
icultural supply chains: a review from an internet of things perspective. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 99 (1), 160–175.


Verdouw, C.N., Wolfert, J., Beulens, A.J.M., Rialland, A., 2016. Virtualization of food
supply chains with the internet of things. J. Food Eng. 176, 128–136.


Wang, H.Z., Lin, G.W., Wang, J.Q., Gao, W.L., Chen, Y.F., Duan, Q.L., 2014. Management
of big data in the internet of things in agriculture based on cloud computing. In:
Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 548. Trans Tech Publications, pp. 1438–1444.


Wang, J., Yue, H., 2017. Food safety pre-warning system based on data mining for a
sustainable food supply chain. Food Control 73, 223–229.


Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W.T., Papadopoulos, T., 2016a. Big data analytics in
logistics and supply chain management: certain investigations for research and ap-
plications. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 176, 98–110.


Wang, Z., Mathiyazhagan, K., Xu, L., Diabat, A., 2016b. A decision-making trial and
evaluation laboratory approach to analyze the barriers to Green Supply Chain


Management adoption in a food packaging company. J. Clean. Prod. 117, 19–28.
Weerabahu, W.M.S.K., Nanayakkara, L.D.J.F., 2015. Linking key success factors of rice


supply chain with the operational strategy in Sri Lanka: an analytical framework. Sri
Lanka Journal of Food and Agriculture 1 (2).


Wernerfelt, B., 1984. A resource-based view of the firm. Strat. Manag. J. 5, 171–180.
Williams, B.D., Roh, J., Tokar, T., Swink, M., 2013. Leveraging supply chain visibility for


responsiveness: the moderating role of internal integration. J. Oper. Manag. 31 (7–8),
543–554.


Wognum, P.N., Bremmers, H., Trienekens, J.H., van der Vorst, J.G., Bloemhof, J.M., 2011.
Systems for sustainability and transparency of food supply chains–Current status and
challenges. Adv. Eng. Inf. 25 (1), 65–76.


Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., Bogaardt, M.J., 2017. Big data in smart farming–a re-
view. Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80.


Xia, H., Houghton, J.A., Clark, J.H., Matharu, A.S., 2016. Potential utilization of un-
avoidable food supply chain wastes–valorization of pea vine wastes. ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng. 4 (11), 6002–6009.


Yakovleva, N., Sarkis, J., Sloan, T., 2012. Sustainable benchmarking of supply chains: the
case of the food industry. Int. J. Prod. Res. 50 (5), 1297–1317.


Yan, B., Shi, S., Ye, B., Zhou, X., Shi, P., 2015. Sustainable development of the fresh
agricultural products supply chain through the application of RFID technology. Inf.
Technol. Manag. 16 (1), 67–78.


Yang, S., Xiao, Y., Zheng, Y., Liu, Y., 2017. The green supply chain design and marketing
strategy for perishable food based on temperature control. Sustainability 9 (9), 1511.


Zangoueinezhad, A., Azar, A., Kazazi, A., 2011. Using SCOR model with fuzzy MCDM
approach to assess competitiveness positioning of supply chains: focus on ship-
building supply chains. Marit. Policy Manag. 38 (1), 93–109.


Zanoni, S., Zavanella, L., 2012. Chilled or frozen? Decision strategies for sustainable food
supply chains. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (2), 731–736.


Zhao, X., Huo, B., Selen, W., Yeung, J., 2011. The impact of internal integration and
relationship commitment on external integration. J. Oper. Manag. 29 (1–2), 17–32.


Zhong, D.R.Y., Tan, P.K., Bhaskaran, P.G., 2017. Data-driven food supply chain man-
agement and systems. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 117 (9), 1779–1781.


Zhu, S., Song, J., Hazen, B.T., Lee, K., Cegielski, C., 2018. How supply chain analytics
enables operational supply chain transparency: an organizational information pro-
cessing theory perspective. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 48 (1), 47–68.


S.S. Kamble, et al.



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref201

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref144

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref144

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref144

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref145

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref146

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref146

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref146

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref147

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref147

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref147

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref148

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref148

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref148

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref149

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref149

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2014.12.011

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref151

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref151

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref151

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref152

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref152

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref153

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref153

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref153

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref154

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref154

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref155

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref156

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref156

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref156

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref157

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref157

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref157

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref158

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref159

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref159

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref159

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref160

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref161

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref161

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref162

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref162

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref162

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref163

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref163

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref164

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref164

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref164

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref165

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref166

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref166

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref166

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref167

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref167

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref168

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref168

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref169

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref169

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref170

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(19)30203-8/sref170


