









When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization:
The Case of JD.com’s C2M Model


Ho-Yin Mak
Sa€ıd Business School, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 1HP, UK, ho-yin.mak@sbs.ox.ac.uk


Zuo-Jun Max Shen*
Department of Industrial Engineering & Operations Research, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA,


maxshen@berkeley.edu


T
he Triple-A supply chain (Lee 2004) has become one of the most influential concepts for practitioners and researchers
in supply chain management. It stipulates that supply chains should strive to improve along the dimensions of agi-


lity, adaptability, and alignment, as opposed to focusing exclusively on cost and efficiency improvements. While various
strategies have since been adopted across different industries to foster the Triple-A, the digitalization movement poses
both new challenges and opportunities for developing Triple-A supply chains. In this article, we shall discuss an emerg-
ing mode of supply chain innovation, known as the consumer-to-manufacturer (C2M) model, and how it enables new
possibilities for achieving Triple-A “digital” supply chains. C2M establishes digital links between end consumers and
upstream manufacturers and product designers, and provides a variety of tactics to shorten the information flow process
of the supply chain. Our discussion focuses on the implementation of C2M at JD.com, a leading online retailer in China.


Key words: consumer-to-manufacturer; Triple-A supply chain; digitalization; agility; adaptability; alignment; online retail
History: Received: September 2020; Accepted: October 2020


1. Background


In his seminal Harvard Business Review article, Lee
(2004) identified the Triple-A supply chain as the
Holy Grail of supply chain management and the dri-
ver of sustained competitive advantage. Since the
publication of the original article, significant
advances have been made in the theoretical under-
standing of the essential attributes of Agility, Adapt-
ability, and Alignment (the Triple-A’s), as well as
strategies to achieve them in practice. While the Tri-
ple-A concept remains timeless, the business land-
scape has transformed over the past decade and half,
and thus the three A’s now intersect with a much
different set of strategic considerations than in the
early 2000s. Notably, supply chain executives now
place a strong emphasis on subjects such as sustain-
ability, resiliency, and digitalization. This article dis-
cusses the intersection of the triple-A concept and
digitalization. In particular, we shall discuss the
implications of innovative strategies, underpinned
by digital technology and big data, that enable firms
to achieve the three A’s in ways that were not possi-
ble in the 2000s. The discussion will build on the
concrete example of JD.com’s consumer-to-manufac-
turer (C2M) platform.


The 2020s will be remembered as the era of digital
technology, big data, and artificial intelligence. Take
the retail industry as an example. Two decades ago,
supply chain planning decisions were largely sup-
ported by sales data and forecasts at the (geographic)
regional, quarterly, (product) categorical, and brand
levels, which were not always digitalized. Today,
retailers possess much more granular and precise
data at the individual consumer and product levels in
real time, not only on purchases, but also on searches
and clicks (on online stores), and views, follows, and
likes (on social media); in addition to a wealth of con-
textual data, ranging from demographic information,
social network connections and past purchase history
of consumers, to specific product attributes (down to
the pixel level of product images). Employing con-
temporary machine learning tools, retailers are now
able to identify complex relationships between pro-
duct and consumer attributes, and purchase behavior.
These insights can help firms make better informed
planning and operations decisions along the supply
chain, from product design to manufacturing, and
from sales and fulfillment.
A core tenet of supply chain management is that


material and information flows (as well as financial
flows) are equally important and must be carefully


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307


Vol. 0, No. 0, xxxx–xxxx 2020, pp. 1–10 DOI 10.1111/poms.13307
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|20|00|0001 © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307




























coordinated. Traditionally, such coordination is
reflected through the strategic choice between push
and pull processes. Push-based supply chains favor
scale economies and planning efficiencies that lead
to cost reductions, at the expense of lower agility,
as the forecast-driven production and distribution
planning fails to take advantage of evolving
demand information. Pull-based supply chains are
demand driven, but may suffer from cost inefficien-
cies (e.g., due to small production batch sizes) and
longer lead times. Lee and Tang (1997) suggest that
delayed differentiation, that is, deferring the stage
of the supply chain after which work-in-process/
products assume their unique identities and thus
lose substitutability, enables a push–pull structure
that can improve agility without jeopardizing cost
efficiencies. They propose to achieve this with three
design strategies, namely, standardization, modular
design, and process restructuring (postponement).
These strategies effectively define a push–pull
boundary at the late-production or assembly stage—
upstream to this boundary, material flow (of work-
in-process inventory) is governed by a push process
driven by forecasts of downstream demand;
whereas flows (of finished products) downstream
from the boundary are governed by a pull process
driven directly by downstream needs.
Delayed differentiation of material flow helps the


supply chain take advantage of updates in demand
information. In the digital age, with the aid of
machine learning-supported forecasting and real-time
automated decision-making, supply chains are able to
push this concept to new frontiers. For example, Lim
et al. (2017) propose fulfillment network design strate-
gies that rely upon real-time informational pooling of
inventory for online retailers. Such strategies are able
to simultaneously improve agility and efficiency of
fulfillment operations. More generally, Acimovic
et al. (2018) discuss how digitalization has enabled
retailers to move on from the traditional trade-off
between speed and price to the broader pursuit of
agile supply chains. Later in this study, we shall dis-
cuss examples of how an online retailer is able to
leverage its digital platform to effectively place the
push–pull boundary further upstream while main-
taining operational efficiency. While globalization has
significantly increased the physical lengths of supply
chains since the 1990s, the latest digitalization devel-
opment has countered by shortening the informa-
tional lengths of supply chains. As a result, even
though material flow lead times have become longer
in many cases (especially under the slow steaming
development in maritime logistics, e.g., Fransoo and
Lee, 2013, Lee et al., 2015), the informational lead
times through supply chain stages have significantly
shrunk, often to effectively zero. This important


development makes way for supply chain designers
to reimagine the three A’s, as we shall discuss in sec-
tion 2. In this study, we discuss an emerging supply
chain paradigm known as the consumer-to-manufac-
turer (C2M) model, and how this novel framework,
when harnessed carefully, exemplifies the Triple-A
supply chain in the digital age.
C2M refers to a family of supply chain strategies


based on direct digital links between end consumers
and upstream manufacturers, often through e-com-
merce platforms as virtual intermediaries. These links
enable direct consumer input on not only demand
forecasts, but even for product and assortment
design. In part due to the geographical concentration
of manufacturers, C2M is pioneered by Chinese e-
commerce platforms such as JD.com and Alibaba.
However, this new paradigm has potential to make
waves across the world. Conceptually, C2M is an
example of structural transformation in supply chain
management enabled by big data and digitalization
capabilities (Lee 2018).
To illustrate the C2M idea, consider the case of Pin-


duoduo (PDD), a Chinese startup founded only in
2015 and went public on NASDAQ in 2018. PDD’s
business model is often compared to Groupon’s (e.g.,
Fortune 2018), in that both enable consumers to
group-buy products at discount prices, but with two
fundamental differences. First, PDD seamlessly mar-
ries the group buying platform with social networks,
and thus takes advantage of social influence in both
understanding and shaping purchase behavior (e.g., a
viral video on a product could turn into viral group
purchases). Second, PDD employs a C2M strategy by
enabling consumer groups to interact directly with
manufacturers over digital media, and even order
products with tailor-made specifications. This enables
manufacturers to design and produce the right prod-
ucts with a guaranteed demand on the one hand,
while engaging consumers and fulfilling their specific
needs at low prices on the other.
In this study, we shall discuss the C2M model in


the context of JD.com (JD), a major Chinese online
retailer often drawing comparisons to Amazon. Like
the case of PDD and Groupon, JD’s supply chain
strategy differentiates with Amazon’s in that it has
much closer links with manufacturers, in part thanks
to the geographic concentration in China. This enables
JD to initiate a variety of supply chain innovations
and implement them through the entire supply chain.
In section 2, we shall first briefly review the Triple-A
concept and how it has evolved in practice in the digi-
tal age. Then in section 3, we shall outline the ele-
ments of JD.com’s C2M initiative and how it fosters
the three A’s. Finally, in section 4, we shall provide
specific examples to highlight how these strategies
work in practice.


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
2 Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307








2. Triple-A Supply Chains in the
Digital Era


The concept of the three A’s have transformed signifi-
cantly in the past one-plus decade. We shall briefly
review the concepts of agility, adaptability, and align-
ment as introduced by Lee (2004), and discuss how
these pursuits have evolved under the rapidly chang-
ing business landscape. In particular, Lee (2004) dis-
cussed supply chain strategies of various firms in the
1990’s–2000’s period that intersected with the strate-
gic imperatives at the time, including outsourcing
and offshoring; as well as provided great foresight
into the importance of the internet and digital technol-
ogy in building sustained supply chain excellence
(see, e.g., Johnson and Whang 2002, for a discussion
of key operations issues in the early phase of e-busi-
ness). We shall build on these insights by drawing
connections to modern digital technologies.


2.1. Evolution of Agility
Lee (2004) defines agility as the ability to respond to
short-term changes in demand or supply quickly, and to
handle external disruptions smoothly. To enable agility, it
is essential for a supply chain to carefully integrate
the management of material and information flow. As
soon as changes in demand/supply status are
detected at any stage, the supply chain must be able
to quickly and transparently share such information
with other stages, and come up with quick maneuvers
in response, such as changing production plans,
rerouting shipments, repurposing capacity across
products, and so on. Such responses necessitate col-
laborative relationships and willingness to share
(often proprietary) information across stages of the
supply chain.
Careful and coordinated choice of product and sup-


ply chain network designs is integral to fostering agi-
lity. Lee (2004) discussed the successful example of
fast fashion companies like H&M and Zara, and the
less successful example of Compaq. In fast fashion,
time to market time is minimized from the product
design stage. Designers start ordering fabric even
before the designs are finalized, to mitigate long sup-
ply lead times; once reliable sales and demand data
from stores are shared upstream, they quickly finalize
designs and production plans. In the case of Compaq
in the 1990s, a long design cycle combined with a long
supply pipeline led to rigidity as demand for new
products evolved, and eventually lost market share.
Lee specifically pointed out delayed differentiation


as a key implementation strategy for agility. Product
and supply chain designs with delayed differentiation
enable firms to quickly reroute or repurpose supplies
as demand information evolves over time. Lee and


Billington (1995) and Feitzinger and Lee (1997) dis-
cuss the (now) well-known case of Hewlett-Packard
employing the postponement strategy to vastly
improve the agility of its printer supply chain. More
generally, Lee and Tang (1997) model the cost-agility
trade-off of delayed differentiation in a supply chain,
which can be achieved through postponement, stan-
dardization, or modular design. With these strategies,
the segment of the supply chain downstream from
the point of differentiation can be reconfigured as a
highly responsive pull process, which empowers agi-
lity.
In the digitalization era, shortened product life


cycles and fickle consumer tastes call for supply
chains to become more agile than ever. Fortunately,
data analytics and digital platforms offer new ways to
implement agility. Lim et al. (2017) discuss a distribu-
tion network design framework that enables online
retailers to embed agility into fulfillment operations.
By integrating advanced demand forecasting, real-
time sharing of demand and inventory data, and nim-
ble allocation of fulfillment routes, an online retailer is
able to perform virtual pooling of inventory across
geographically dispersed facilities, and thereby
achieving agility without jeopardizing efficiency.
While this strategy maintains the push–pull boundary
at the fulfillment stage, the pull-based fulfillment
logic expands horizontally across the geographically
dispersed fulfillment network, which unlocks agility.
Digital platforms have also unlocked new possibili-


ties for supply chains to extend agility further
upstream, by integrating the manufacturing and pro-
duct design functions. JD utilizes its consumer data at
the retail level to learn and predict changes in con-
sumption trends, feeds such forecasts digitally
through its supply chain, and engages partners at dif-
ferent stages of the supply chain to take coordinated
action. Thus, new products (or modifications to exist-
ing products) are developed, manufactured, and dis-
tributed to meet new demand agilely. We shall
discuss this further in sections 3 and 4.


2.2. Evolution of Adaptability
Lee (2004) framed adaptability as the ability to adjust a
supply chain’s design to meet structural shifts in markets,
and to modify supply networks to strategies, products, and
technologies. In contrast with agility, which pertains
mainly to the tactical- and operational-level decisions,
adaptability is a strategic-level attribute of a supply
chain. In the late 1990s to early 2000s, a key strategic
consideration of many supply chains was whether to
offshore production to lower cost countries (often
China), and to expand sales to emerging markets. The
companies who were able to capitalize on these struc-
tural shifts were those with the adaptability to deftly


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society 3


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307




pivot their strategic supply networks. Key to enabling
adaptability is to develop awareness of strategic and
technological shifts, the changing needs of end con-
sumers, as well as the alignment of product and tech-
nological cycles. To implement adaptive strategies, a
supply chain must build relationships with suppliers
and partners (including intermediaries) with access to
a wide range of markets and manufacturing/logistics
bases, and be flexible in product designs.
Even at the relatively early stage of e-commerce,


Lee (2004) already pointed out the importance of
learning from data in uncovering these structural
shifts and taking corresponding action. He discussed
the example of Microsoft’s (and contract manufac-
turer Flextronics’) launch of Xbox in 2001, where the
supply chain quickly shifted from the strategy of
manufacturing close to key markets (in Mexico and
Hungary), which favored time to market, to one of
offshoring to China to squeeze out cost savings. The
key was Microsoft’s observation that the competitive
priority shifted from speed to cost, and its adaptabil-
ity in swiftly changing course.
Digitalization has posed both new challenges and


opportunities for supply chains to explore novel
adaptability strategies. On the one hand, the breadth
and depth of market and consumer data made avail-
able by digital platforms, together with advanced
machine learning tools, equip firms with unprece-
dented capabilities to detect and predict structural
trends in markets as (and even before) they happen.
On the other hand, these capabilities are now largely
democratized and thus those who fail to capitalize
them to respond and adapt to market shifts will be left
behind. A prime example is Netflix, who started as an
online DVD rental by mail service that competed with
Blockbuster. While its original subscription-by-mail
supply chain motivated interesting operations inno-
vations (e.g., Bassamboo et al. 2009), it detected the
structural shift of the entertainment market moving
toward digital delivery. Starting from 2007, it shifted
its focus from the physical DVD rental system to the
online streaming model, which delivers the same
entertainment content to consumers through a com-
pletely virtual supply chain. This drastic supply chain
overhaul, from physical to fully virtual, was enabled
by Netflix’s strategic adaptability attributed to its dig-
ital prowess.
In physical supply chains, digital capabilities also


enable supply chain networks to adapt to structural
changes in ways not possible before. The network
redesign effort of LEGO in the early 2010s may serve
as an example. With its production capacities tradi-
tionally concentrated in Europe, LEGO faced chal-
lenges in meeting its strong demand growth in Asian
and North America, due to long lead times. To
address this structural problem, LEGO redesigned its


global network and added new plants in China and
Mexico to specifically serve the Asian and North
American markets. The vital companion to this physi-
cal redesign is its concurrent investment in digital
and data analytics capabilities that enable LEGO to
quickly adjust production plans to evolving demand
forecasts. Without the digital component of this rede-
sign strategy, LEGO would not be able to take advan-
tage of the reduced production lead times of the
redesigned network.


2.3. Evolution of Alignment
Lee (2004) described alignment as the ability to create
incentives for better performance. This refers to aligning
incentives of different players in the supply chain to
ensure that every stage optimizes its operations under
the common objective of maximizing supply chain’s
(rather than each stage’s) performance. Besides align-
ing objectives, Lee also emphasized the importance of
sharing knowledge and information freely among
parties in the supply chain, a practice particularly
important in the digital age.
In the supply chain operations literature, various


mechanisms and contracts have been proposed and
implemented to achieve alignment (see, e.g., Cachon
2003, Lariviere 2016). These mechanisms aim to align
the objectives of different stakeholders along the sup-
ply chain such that they benefit from improving the
supply chain’s overall performance rather than from
marginalizing each other. Besides using operational
contracts as an alignment device, the topic of supply
chain financing is also key. In particular, careful use
of instruments such as trade credits (see, e.g., Yang
and Birge 2018) can help foster alignment by reducing
the financing costs of smaller players.
Alignment can often be achieved through the use of


supply chain intermediaries. In the pre-digital age,
intermediaries (such as Li & Fung in the textiles
industry) were important in providing financing (due
to their lower capital costs) and facilitating trust
between supply chain parties. In the digital age, inter-
mediaries often take the form of digital platforms. A
prime example is Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba,
runs the world’s largest (by transaction volume)
online shopping marketplace Taobao. Following Ali-
baba’s asset-light business model (Taobao does not
own products sold on its platform, but instead facili-
tate transactions between consumers and indepen-
dent sellers), distribution and fulfillment operations
for Taobao are handled by third-party logistics provi-
ders (3PLs). To improve alignment of the downstream
supply chain, Alibaba launched the Cainiao smart
logistics platform. The platform operates as a “digital
control tower” to coordinate the distribution and ful-
fillment process. While the fulfillment process typi-
cally involves multiple independent players (seller


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
4 Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307
















and one or multiple 3PLs), the platform aims to
ensure tight digital integration between the logistics
and e-commerce platforms to achieve high efficiency
and agility. This model contrasts sharply with JD’s
model of (downstream) vertical integration, where
the online retailer owns much of the distribution
logistics infrastructure.


3. Consumer-to-Manufacturer (C2M)
Model


The prevalence of digital technologies and the rise of
a new generation of digital-savvy consumers have
posed novel challenges for supply chain executives.
Influenced by social networks and digital media, con-
sumer preferences and demand are evolving and pro-
liferating at unprecedented pace. As consumer
experiences become visible and shared rapidly over
social networks, it is now as critical as ever for supply
chains to uphold their service levels and meet con-
sumers’ needs. This calls for high levels of agility and
adaptability, as supply chains must respond to both
fluctuations and structural shifts quickly and even
proactively, as well as alignment, as information from
end consumers must pass through the entire chain
quickly and for the chain to take coordinated action.
The C2M model provides a novel framework for sup-
ply chains to build a direct link between the final con-
sumers and the upstream production stage.
In this section, we discuss the implementation of


JD’s C2M platform (referred to as JC2M hereafter).
JD’s core vision in supply chain innovation is that
future supply chains will be fully demand driven
under a pull logic, rather than production driven
under a push logic. To build demand-driven supply
chains with high service levels, digitalization is vital.
Like other leaders in online retail (such as Amazon),
JD has invested heavily in digitalizing its downstream
operations, for example, forecasting, pricing, sales,
distribution, and reverse logistics. In addition, its
proximity to the Chinese manufacturing base has
enabled it to integrate and digitalize the upstream
operations of its supply chain, in ways often inaccessi-
ble to its Western counterparts. This setup enables JD
to build digital links between downstream sales oper-
ations and upstream manufacturing and integrate the
chain seamlessly. The JC2M platform enables JD to
reengineer its supply chain, switching away from tra-
ditional production-driven configurations toward
demand-driven ones.
JD is China’s largest retailer and largest internet


company by revenue ($83.4 billion in 2019, Forbes
2020). As of June 30, 2020, JD had 417.4 million active
users, and recorded a 29.9% year-on-year growth rate.
In June 2020, JD.COM’s average daily active mobile


users increased by 40% year-on-year (JD.com, 2020).
This massive user and transaction volume empowers
JD with two distinct advantages. First, it gives JD the
scale economies it needs to operate the supply chain
efficiently, as well as the leverage to push innovations
through the supply chain. Second, it provides JD with
a wealth of consumer preference and behavior data
that informs its digital supply chain innovations, par-
ticularly under the C2M framework. Figure 1 illus-
trates the conceptual framework of the JC2M model,
where bold and line arrows represent material and
information flow, respectively. Below, we shall dis-
cuss how this conceptual framework is embodied by
the four core functions of JC2M model, and how these
functions help enable a digital, triple-A supply chain.


3.1. New Product Design and Simulation
The new product development process (Kavadias and
Ulrich 2020, Krishnan and Ulrich 2001) involves the
firm identifying and/or anticipating an unfulfilled
need of consumers or a void in the competitive mar-
ket. The JC2M platform helps manufacturers accom-
plish this through a digitalized process. First, through
machine learning on its massive user data, JD is able
to identify combinations of product attributes with
unfulfilled potential. While this concept is not entirely
new, what makes JD’s approach unique is that its
models are able to produce four-dimensional recom-
mendations for product design: potential product
styles/attributes, potential price points, potential buy-
ers, and potential sales forecasts. That is, in uncover-
ing an opportunity for a new product design, the
manufacturer already knows how much to sell it for,
whom to sell it to, what volume (and when) it expects
to sell, and how to market it.
This process greatly reduces the need for trial and


error in the product design process, which leads to
lower product development costs and streamlined
development and planning cycles. With the support
of the JC2M platform, brands have been able to


Product 
Design Manufacturing Distribution Consumers


JC2M 
Platform Mass consumer 


behavior data
Ideation: 
Identifying 
market void 
and target 
segment


Personalized customization


Precise 
demand 
forecasting


Efficient 
production 
planning


Figure 1 Conceptual Framework of the JC2M Platform [Color figure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society 5


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://www.wileyonlinelibrary.com

































https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307




reduce their product demand research time by 75%
and shorten their new product launch cycle by 67%.
What’s more, the platform gives the supply chain a
massive head start once the product design is adopted
by a manufacturer, as plans for production, pricing,
and distributions can be derived digitally according
to these systematic forecasts. JD also leverages this
“reverse product development” process to deepen its
collaborative relationships with upstream brands and
manufacturers, thereby gaining access to better qual-
ity, customized products, more favorable purchasing
costs, and marketing resources.
Besides big data analytics, the JC2M platform also


engages in “small data” studies to gain insights into
new product releases. Ahead of product launch, JD is
able to pinpoint specific target consumer groups and
roll out simulated product trials (e.g., A/B testing).
Feedback from such small-scale but highly targeted
experiments help JD to gain deeper insights into pur-
chase behavior and consumer preferences with regard
to the new product, validate demand and pricing pre-
dictions, and to optimize the purchase experience.
Compared with conventional processes, the C2M


reverse product development framework offers
potential to strengthen the supply chain along the
adaptability and alignment dimensions. First, lever-
aging its massive online transaction volume to learn
consumer trends, JD gains the key capability to detect
(nowcast) and forecast structural shifts in consumer
needs. The C2M framework enables these insights to
penetrate through the entire supply chain in real time.
As a result, JD is able to react to these changes not
only by adjusting its consumer-facing operations, but
also by bringing new products to market. With a high
degree of alignment through digitally coordinated
operations across firm boundaries, these new prod-
ucts reach consumers promptly. Through feeding
end-consumer insights directly to manufacturers, JD
also provides strong incentives for manufacturers to
coordinate its development, production, and market-
ing efforts with downstream players, thus strengthen-
ing alignment of the supply chain.


3.2. Targeted Product Trials
Product trials are a must in today’s marketing cam-
paigns. They facilitate communication between man-
ufacturers and consumers—the former learns about
consumers’ preferences and feedback on products,
and the latter learns about features and value of the
manufacturers’ offering. Trial campaigns are crucial
in both attracting new customers and retaining exist-
ing ones. Due to the expensive nature of product tri-
als, they must be directed to the optimal audience to
maximize returns.
JD’s product trial platform aims to precisely iden-


tify target consumers for trial campaigns. Based on


past consumer purchase data, JD is able to label con-
sumers based on user background (user portrait),
purchase behavior (behavior portrait), and their affin-
ity for related product categories and brands. A key
innovation of JD’s product trial platform is that it inte-
grates supply chain operations into planning of pro-
duct trials. For example, in selecting target customers
by geographical location, the platform evaluates not
only the conversion and learning potential for the tar-
get geographical market, but also the logistics impli-
cations (i.e., stock availability in distribution hubs,
shipping costs, and lead times). Manufacturers can
also monitor the distribution of trial products on the
platform in real time, as well as detailed, multidimen-
sional feedback on customer conversions.
Integrating marketing and operations considera-


tions in product trials efforts have two important
implications. First, this ensures cost consciousness in
the selection of target customers to maximize not only
effectiveness, but also efficiency, of consumer acquisi-
tion. Second, this enables both customers and manu-
facturers to learn about not only the product-
customer fit, but also the entire purchase experience.
For example, Luo et al. (2020) find that, on online
retail platforms, the quality of logistics services can
significantly alter consumer demand. Such insights
into the purchase experience, in addition to the pro-
duct itself, provides yet another opportunity for the
supply chain to enhance its alignment dimension.


3.3. Personalized Customization
Perhaps the most salient feature of the C2M model is
that it enables an end-to-end “pull” process through
the entire supply chain, from product design to end
consumers. Modern (especially Gen-Y and Gen-Z)
consumers tend to value both product quality and
personalization. This poses a tough test on a supply
chain’s agility, as consumers expect their personal-
ized needs to be met swiftly. The JC2M platform
addresses this by a personalization service that
enables consumers to place customized orders
directly with manufacturers, and ensures manufac-
turers fulfill these orders responsively and efficiently.
The service provides system tools to support cus-
tomization orders in both B2C and B2B scenarios,
such as customization of product attributes and pro-
duct volume, as well as customization for enterprise
customers.
Traditionally, the make-to-order system tends to be


a niche supply chain configuration only applicable to
limited product categories. While the advantages of
the make-to-order model, that is, better match of con-
sumers’ needs and reduced reliance on demand fore-
casts, are obvious, so are its shortcomings, including
long lead times. Digitally integrated supply chains
have found new ways to overcome these


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
6 Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307








shortcomings. In the case of the JC2M platform, big-
data-driven forecasts underpin operations planning
at every stage of the supply chain. Even in a make-to-
order setting, this integrated planning process pre-
pares both upstream manufacturing (e.g., planning of
work-in-process inventory) and downstream distribu-
tion (e.g., scheduling of shipment lots) ahead of order
placement, and streamlines operations by dynamic
allocation of production and shipping capacity in real
time. This capability allows the supply chain to vastly
shorten lead times, once orders are confirmed.
Conceptually, the integration of digital forecasting


and planning equips the supply chain with high digi-
tal agility that enables the make-to-order system to
work as efficiently as a make-to-stock system, but
with more flexibility in product configuration. This
digital agility is conceptually analogous with the vir-
tual pooling concept in fulfillment networks studied
in Lim et al. (2017). In both cases, digital coordination
of operations across the boundaries of facilities and
supply chain stages enables them to operate as one
virtual entity, thus achieving quick response to cus-
tomer demand as well as efficient operations.


3.4. Smart Factory
Smart manufacturing builds on key digital technolo-
gies in the Industry 4.0 movement (Olsen and Tomlin,
2020), including the Internet-of-Things (IoT), artificial
intelligence, additive manufacturing, and automation.
In a digital supply chain, it is vital to extend smart
control beyond the factory boundaries through the
span of the supply chain. One of the core services of
JC2M is its smart factory platform that integrates digi-
tal production planning with the rest of the supply
chain.
The primary aim of the smart factory platform is to


leverage digital integration to achieve intelligent con-
trol of rapid-response, low-inventory, efficient small-
batch production operations. It provides services such
as product quality management, factory production
docking, supply chain collaboration, capacity pre-
sales, order aggregation, and order dispatching. The
front end of the smart factory platform provides con-
sumers with a variety of customization purchasing
scenarios to meet the diverse, personalized, and cus-
tomized shopping needs; whereas the back end coor-
dinates the upstream processes to respond to demand
quickly, following a pull-type supply chain model.
The use of the smart factory platform to integrate


operations of the supply chain can be considered digi-
talized extension of the supply chain intermediary
strategy discussed in Lee (2004), which is key to fos-
tering alignment. It is known in the literature (e.g.,
Belavina and Girotra 2012) that intermediaries pro-
vide transactional benefits (by improving efficiencies
such as lowering financing costs and aggregating


orders to achieve economies of scale) and informa-
tional benefits (i.e., aggregating information from dif-
ferent parties to inform better planning) to the supply
chain. In addition, Belavina and Girotra (2012) further
show another benefit of intermediaries such as Li &
Fung in the apparel industry: by pooling the sourcing
needs of multiple buyers, it is able to align the supply
chain by providing sourcing commitments to suppli-
ers, while at the same time responsively adjust its
supply base. The smart factory platform achieves sim-
ilar benefits using a novel innovation known as capac-
ity pre-sales—it allows the platform to pre-commit to
purchasing production capacities from manufacturers
in advance of actual orders. This model helps create a
pull process with quick response time and low fin-
ished inventory requirements, and streamlines supply
chain financing (especially with small manufactur-
ers).


4. Successful Cases of JC2M


In this section, we shall discuss several successful
cases of JC2M, spanning a range of product cate-
gories. In each case, the four core services of JC2M
enable the supply chain to identify new trends or
opportunities in the market, and to address cus-
tomers’ needs in an agile, adaptive, and aligned man-
ner.


4.1. Home Refrigerators
As discussed in section 3.1, JD leverages its massive
consumer data and machine learning technologies to
generate proposals for manufacturers to develop,
upgrade, and customize their products. This helps the
supply chain respond agilely to meet ever-changing
consumer needs.
Recently, JC2M completed a market study on the


customization of new refrigerators, in collaboration
with a household appliance brand. Through mining
JD’s transaction data, the study highlighted a number
of key insights into the refrigerator market. In particu-
lar, though the market has enjoyed stable growth in
volume, consumer demand is drifting toward
upgraded specifications and lower price points.
Strong consumer preferences are detected for four
aspects of specification upgrade: in exterior design/
style (e.g., preference for multi-door designs and
stainless steel panels), capacity (e.g., 300 L and
above), energy rating, and refrigeration mode (e.g.,
air-cooled systems). Meanwhile, JD found that aver-
age consumer spending on refrigerator products
declined from the previous year, and unit prices are
moving toward the middle range. Geographically, the
market is concentrated in Tier-1 and Tier-2 cities of
China. Due to smaller living spaces in Tier-1 cities
(e.g., Beijing and Shanghai), the demand for high-


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society 7


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307




capacity (exceeding 300 L), multi-door units is rela-
tively small; whereas demand for such units is high in
cities with lower housing costs. There is also a growth
in demand for customized upgrades such as intelli-
gent control, micro-crystallization, odor purification,
and wet/dry storage.
In view of the aforementioned market trends and


with the brand’s existing product offering, JC2M rec-
ommended redesigning the product line to capture
the high potential market segments, namely, high-ca-
pacity (501–600 L) and medium-capacity (301–400 L)
models with side-by-side doors, and small-capacity
three-door models, featuring first-rate energy effi-
ciency, intelligent control, micro-crystallization, odor
purification, and wet/dry storage. Since the launch of
these new products, sales figures of the brand in June
reached six times the category average.


4.2. Ultrawide Monitors
Adaptability and alignment help supply chains to
weather fluctuations in volatile consumer markets. In
today’s digital landscape, these two attributes are
deeply intertwined, and both rely upon in-depth col-
laborations among supply chain players, from retail-
ers and distributors to manufacturers and component
suppliers. In the case of JD, these relationships enable
the retailer to coordinate with key partners and take
collaborative actions to address market changes, and
even transform these challenges into opportunities to
deliver new growth. We shall discuss an example
based on the supply chain of ultrawide (21:9) moni-
tors.
Until recently, the market of ultrawide monitors


was monopolized by a single major brand, resulting
in high prices and unmet consumer demand. JD’s
market research has identified a brand new market
for monitors, the population of gamers, who is show-
ing rapidly growing demand for ultrawide curved-
screen monitors. To address this emerging market, it
was crucial to assess the supply chain’s capability to
deliver such a new product category. In particular,
the key technological component is the LED screens.
These screens are manufactured in large panels and
then cut to specific sizes, a process that leads to signif-
icant cutting wastes. In researching manufacturing
capabilities, JD collaborated with LED screen manu-
facturers and devised a novel solution to the problem
of making 21:9 screens with minimal cutting waste,
by providing an efficient solution to the difficult two-
dimensional cutting stock problem (Gilmore and
Gomory, 1965). This further enabled JD and the screen
manufacturer to cater specifications to user needs and
determine pricing levels. Thus, the identification of a
downstream market shift has driven innovation in the
far-upstream component manufacturers. This would
not be possible without a digital supply chain


integration infrastructure like JD’s. Concurrently, to
bring the products to market, JD collaborated with a
number of monitor brands to test product designs
and configurations. The streamlined development
and testing processes enabled the products to be
launched in accelerated cycles. This helped the brands
gain significant market shares as new entrants, and
even establish pricing power over the market incum-
bent.
The ultrawide monitor example showcases how an


aligned and adaptive supply chain is able to speed up
the new product development and launch cycle.
Under the traditional supply chain model with serial
development processes, it would take six months to
develop new screen panels, four months for the OEM
to manufacture and deliver the monitors, and an
additional two months for the brand owner to ship
the final products to the retailer. In the digitally
aligned supply chain, however, these processes occur
in parallel. As the screen manufacturer makes the
screens, the OEM develops the mold for the monitor
synchronously, while the brand owner applies for
product qualification, and the retailer launches the
advertising and pre-sale campaign simultaneously.
This effectively shortens the time to market from over
twelve months to about six months. Thus, digitally
enabled alignment also enables the supply chain to be
adaptive (in changing its production configuration)
and agile (in bringing products to market quickly).


4.3. Laundry Detergent Pods
The next example, involving laundry detergent pods,
showcases a product innovation driven by supply
chain motivations, and enabled by sound understand-
ing of consumer needs and preferences.
Laundry detergent pods, while quite common in


Western markets, are relatively new to the Chinese
market. In its analysis of the market of laundry deter-
gents, JC2M found that the product category has been
a loss leader despite strong (40% year-on-year)
growth. Through analyzing the supply chain, JC2M
identified the high logistics costs, due to the bulky
nature of the liquid-form products, as a major reason.
On the other hand, market intelligence revealed that
consumers for laundry detergent are primarily inter-
ested in product functionality and show little prefer-
ence over product form. Thus, laundry pods, with
compact packaging, show promise as an emerging
product.
As discussed in section 3.1, JC2M aims to identify


potential product attributes, potential price points,
potential buyers, and potential sales volume for new
product recommendations. For laundry pods, based
on user behavior data from JD, the platform produced
the representative user portrait: young white-collar
workers engaged in social media platforms such as


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
8 Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307




Douyin (the Chinese version of TikTok) and Xiao-
hongshu. Based on this, JC2M estimated that 30% of
the detergent sales volume could switch to laundry
beads, suggesting a potential market 15 times its exist-
ing size. Based on this recommendation, JC2M carried
out product simulation trials with targeted consumer
groups to test the possible responses to alternative
price bands.
Once the new product recommendation was


adopted, JC2M carefully engaged with manufactur-
ers in choosing product attributes with potential
demand implications, such as concentration, shape,
color, packaging, and logistics, and analyzed cost
accounting for different stages of the supply chain.
To better segment the market, JC2M created a low-
end generic product with the detergent manufac-
turer, and a high-end product in cooperation with
established brands. The results were promising: the
first three laundry pod products launched quickly
ranked among top 10 in sales of laundry products,
and the market share of laundry beads soared from
3% to 8%. Overall, the new product category
recorded high sales growth (198% year-on-year) and
net positive margins.


5. Discussion and Conclusion


The digitalization movement has unlocked myriad
innovations in supply chain management practice.
Revolutionary technologies, such as smart-phone-
based retail, mobile payment, machine learning and
artificial intelligence, automated manufacturing,
industrial IoT have moved from nascent to ubiquitous
in the span of a few years. With adoption of every
new technology, some conventional supply chain
management practice becomes obsolete. As our com-
munity strives to develop new theory that inform our
understanding of these advancements, we shall also
revisit the foundational concepts, such as the Triple-A
supply chain, that remain timeless but are embodied
in new forms.
By drawing digital links from end consumers to


manufacturers (and through the intermediate supply
chain), the C2M concept enables inventive strategies
to accomplish the three A’s: agility, adaptability, and
alignment, some of which were unimaginable just a
couple decades ago. In theory, C2M prepares the
supply chain to operate as an end-to-end pull pro-
cess that responds to consumers (changing) needs
while maintaining high efficiency and speed. This
can be the start of a paradigm shift—while the tradi-
tional push-based supply chain epitomizes the con-
ventional firm-centric philosophy of business, a truly
pull-based supply chain is a move toward a con-
sumer-centric model that provides solutions to con-
sumers’ problems.


Thus far, C2M is pioneered by Chinese tech compa-
nies like JD, Alibaba, and PDD. These firms are in a
somewhat unique position due to their geographical
and industrial proximity to massive consumer mar-
kets as well as manufacturing base. This is not to
say that C2M is an exclusively Chinese strategy.
About a decade ago, LEGO offered a make-to-order
service, known as LEGO Design byMe, which
allowed consumers to create their own LEGO sets
digitally with a software and order them. The pro-
gram was discontinued in 2012 due to operational
inefficiencies of the make-to-order process. LEGO
now offers a different program, known as LEGO
Ideas, that solicits digital design ideas from con-
sumers. Instead of allowing consumers to order
these sets, LEGO allows other consumers to vote on
them, and produce only the most popular sets. This
strategy retains the consumer-driven design element
of the Design byMe program, but overcomes its
operational efficiency, since the voting system
serves as a filter that assures a high-enough demand
volume for the designs selected for production.
While these strategies are rather unique to the case
of LEGO, who operates a vertically integrated sup-
ply chain from product design to retail, they show-
case that non-Chinese and non-retail supply chains
can also benefit from C2M innovations.
Recent events, including the COVID-19 pandemic,


have caused firms to rethink their global supply chain
network design, and it is plausible that future supply
chains will at least partially diversify away from the
current high concentration in the East Asia region. At
the same time, the Chinese tech giants are also seek-
ing to expand their e-tailing businesses globally.
Therefore, we expect C2M to become a truly global
phenomenon in the coming years. This will bring
about new challenges, as the increased geographical
distances (longer physical lead times) and consumer
cultural heterogeneity (difficulty to forecast demand)
will be important obstacles to overcome in C2M oper-
ations.
The technology further progresses, the theory and


practice of supply chain management will continue
to evolve in imaginative ways. For example, emerg-
ing technologies such as the Blockchain and smart
contracts (see Olsen and Tomlin, 2020, for a discus-
sion) could open up new possibilities for alignment,
building on the concept of digital trust. This may, for
example, pose a challenge to the intermediary busi-
ness model. Smart contracts and automated manu-
facturing may also hold the key to fostering digital
agility, as orders and transactions can be completed
and verified digitally without human intervention.
Thus, the legacy of Hau Lee’s Triple-A supply chain
will continue to inspire practitioners and researchers
in supply chain management in the years to come.


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society 9


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307
























Acknowledgments


The authors are grateful to Professor Hau Lee and Professor
Chris Tang (special issue editor) for their insightful feed-
back, which helped improve this study. The authors also
thank Mr. Chen Lin (JD Intelligent Supply Chain Y Business
Unit leader), and JD colleagues Hao Hu, Xiaotong Wang,
Longyu Zhang, Ruixue Zhou, and Danping Liu for helpful
discussions.


References
Acimovic, J., M. Lim, H.-Y. Mak. 2018. Moving beyond the speed-


price tradeoff. MIT Sloan Manage. Rev. 59(4):12–15.


Bassamboo, A., S. Kumar, R. S. Randhawa. 2009. Dynamics of
new product introduction in closed rental systems. Oper. Res.
57(6): 1347–1359.


Belavina, E., K. Girotra. 2012. The relational advantages of inter-
mediation. Management Sci. 58(9): 1614–1631.


Cachon, G. P. 2003. Supply chain coordination with contracts.
Handbooks Oper. Res. Manage. Sci. 11: 227–339.


Feitzinger, E., H. L. Lee. 1997. Mass customization at Hewlett-
Packard: The power of postponement. Harv. Bus. Rev. 75: 116–
123.


Forbes. 2020. JD.com (JD). Available at https://www.Forbes.com/
companies/jd/#5009783f4f20


Fortune. 2018. The Groupon of China Is Going Public—and It’s More
Expensive Than Alibaba, Snap, or Facebook’s IPO. Available at
https://fortune.com/2018/07/26/pinduoduo-ipo-alibaba-facebook-
groupon-amazon/


Fransoo, J. C., C.-Y. Lee. 2013. The critical role of ocean container
transport in global supply chain performance. Prod. Oper.
Manag. 22(2): 253–268.


Gilmore, P. C., R. E. Gomory. 1965. Multistage cutting stock prob-
lems of two and more dimensions. Oper. Res. 13(1): 94–120.


JD.com. 2020. Press release: JD.com Announces 2020 second quar-
ter and interim financial results. Available at https://ir.jd.
com/news-releases/news-release-details/jdcom-announces-


2020-second-quarter-and-interim-financial (accessed date
September 20, 2020).


Johnson, M. E., S. Whang. 2002. E-business and supply chain
management: An overview and framework. Prod. Oper.
Manag. 11(4): 413–423.


Kavadias, S., K. T. Ulrich. 2020. Innovation and new product
development: Reflections and insights from the research
published in the first 20 years of Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management. Manuf. Serv. Oper. Manag. 22(1):
84–92.


Krishnan, V., K. T. Ulrich. 2001. Product development decisions:
A review of the literature. Management Sci. 47(1): 1–21.


Lariviere, M. A. 2016. Om forum – Supply chain contracting:
Doughnuts to bubbles. Manuf. Serv. Oper. Manag. 18(3): 309–
313.


Lee, C.-Y., H. L. Lee, J. Zhang. 2015. The impact of slow ocean
steaming on delivery reliability and fuel consumption. Transp.
Res. Part E: Log. Transp. Rev. 76: 176–190.


Lee, H. L. 2018. Big data and the innovation cycle. Prod. Oper.
Manag. 27(9): 1642–1646.


Lee, H. L., C. Billington. 1995. The evolution of supply-chain-man-
agement models and practice at Hewlett-Packard. Interfaces 25
(5): 42–63.


Lee, H. L. 2004. The Triple-A supply chain. Harv. Bus. Rev. 82(10):
102–113.


Lee, H. L., C. S. Tang. 1997. Modelling the costs and benefits of
delayed product differentiation. Management Sci. 43(1): 40–53.


Lim, M. K., H.-Y. Mak, Z.-J.-M. Shen. 2017. Agility and proximity
considerations in supply chain design. Management Sci. 63(4):
1026–1041.


Luo, J., Y. Rong, H. Zheng. 2020. Impacts of logistics information
on sales: Evidence from Alibaba. Nav. Res. Log. 67(8): 646–669.
https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.21884


Olsen, T. L., B. Tomlin. 2020. Industry 4.0: Opportunities and
challenges for operations management. Manuf. Serv. Oper.
Manag. 22(1): 113–122.


Yang, S. A., J. R. Birge. 2018. Trade credit, risk sharing, and
inventory financing portfolios. Management Sci. 64(8): 3667–
3689.


Mak and Max Shen: Digital Triple-A Supply Chains with C2M
10 Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–10, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society


Please Cite this article in press as: Mak, H.-Y., Z.-J., Max Shen. When Triple-A Supply Chains Meet Digitalization: The Case of JD.com’s
C2M Model. Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307



https://www.Forbes.com/companies/jd/#5009783f4f20

https://www.Forbes.com/companies/jd/#5009783f4f20

https://fortune.com/2018/07/26/pinduoduo-ipo-alibaba-facebook-groupon-amazon/

https://fortune.com/2018/07/26/pinduoduo-ipo-alibaba-facebook-groupon-amazon/

https://ir.jd.com/news-releases/news-release-details/jdcom-announces-2020-second-quarter-and-interim-financial

https://ir.jd.com/news-releases/news-release-details/jdcom-announces-2020-second-quarter-and-interim-financial

https://ir.jd.com/news-releases/news-release-details/jdcom-announces-2020-second-quarter-and-interim-financial

https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.21884

https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13307


