









Int. J. Production Economics 229 (2020) 107889


Available online 8 August 2020
0925-5273/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


New technologies in operations and supply chains: Implications 
for sustainability 


Yang Liu a,*, Qinghua Zhu b, Stefan Seuring c 


a Adam Smith Business School, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom 
b Antai College of Economics & Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 
c Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany   


A R T I C L E  I N F O   


Keywords 
New technologies 
Sustainability 
Industrial 4.0 
Smart manufacturing 


A B S T R A C T   


In this editorial piece, we first introduce the theme and objectives of the special issue on new technologies in 
operations and supply chains as well as their implications for sustainability. The papers comprising the special 
issue are then summarized, and major findings are briefly presented. Based on our observations on the sub-
missions and the research gaps yet to be addressed, we attempt to offer our views on the directions for future 
research in the same research agenda, including discussion around research scope, research theory, research 
methodology, and research findings as well as in-depth studies concerning contemporary and imperative issues 
confronting operations and supply chain managers.   


1. Introduction 


In the production and operations management (POM) of today’s 
manufacturing, there is an ever-increasing application of new technol-
ogies. The rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI), machine 
learning, new-generation data-driven information technologies, and 
new energy technologies for example, is surely unprecedented and has 
facilitated the advent of a ‘new industrial revolution’ (Dirican, 2015; 
Wuest et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017). In particular, the continuing inte-
gration of (increasingly) intelligent communication technologies with 
manufacturing can trigger the development of smart factories, intelli-
gent manufacturing system architectures and intelligent manufacturing 
technology systems (Li et al., 2017). This new era of industrial trans-
formation will undoubtedly bring about game-changing approaches, 
models, processes and systems in operations management, production 
planning and control, supply chain and logistics management. 


We have seen a growing body of literature in recent years that have 
started to explore implications of these new technologies in 
manufacturing (Chen et al., 2012; Dirican, 2015; Wang et al., 2016; 
Wuest et al., 2016; Wamba et al., 2017; Koh et al., 2019) These initial 
studies have claimed that high-efficiency, high-quality, and 
cost-effective products and services for customers enhance the 
competitiveness of a manufacturing firm. This will be facilitated by the 
fusion and optimization of various stages of a manufacturing lifecycle 


with new technologies (Wang et al., 2016; Zhong et al., 2016; Braganza 
et al., 2017; Gunasekaran et al., 2017). For instance, the adoption of 
autonomous-intelligent systems in developing automated machines that 
are clever, more effective and efficient to run (Pan, 2016), the utilization 
of the big data generated from the Internet of things (IoTs) in product 
design to enhance better customer experience (Nozaki et al., 2017), and 
the application of AI in optimizing logistics and supply networks (Wang 
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). It is obvious that these new technologies 
in manufacturing can create great opportunities for both new pro-
ducts/services and immense productivity improvement (Wuest et al., 
2016; Kache; Seuring, 2017; Makridakis, 2017). 


Yet while there has been much discussion about the impact of new 
technologies on such matters, there has been less coverage as to whether 
their applications could improve sustainability performance in the POM 
literature. This is despite the new technologies raising key questions. For 
example, the increasing application of digital technologies in operations 
and supply chain management is one of the major drivers of change. It 
stays open, whether the digital technologies will reduce the negative 
environmental impact, such as by avoiding certain products to be pro-
duced? For manufacturing firms, will the wide adoption of autonomous 
machines in factories lead to unwanted social impacts such as increased 
unemployment and greater wealth inequalities? Both on the environ-
mental and social issues, this might be even harder to answer, as job 
gains and losses often occur in different parts of the supply chain, in 


* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: yang.liu@glasgow.ac.uk (Y. Liu), qhzhu@sjtu.edu.cn (Q. Zhu), seuring@uni-kassel.de (S. Seuring).  


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 


International Journal of Production Economics 


journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe 


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107889 
Received 31 July 2020; Accepted 2 August 2020   



















mailto:yang.liu@glasgow.ac.uk

mailto:qhzhu@sjtu.edu.cn

mailto:seuring@uni-kassel.de

www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09255273

https://http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107889

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107889

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107889

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107889&domain=pdf




International Journal of Production Economics 229 (2020) 107889


2


many cases even in different countries. This interplay of information 
technology and sustainability thus deserves more attention from the 
POM research community. This creates a new arena for academics and 
practitioners to study and explain the degree of these far-reaching im-
pacts, and potentially find solutions to addressing the three-pillars of 
sustainability as a result of adopting new technologies in manufacturing. 


This special issue follows the notion that new technologies in 
manufacturing is a fast-growing and important topic in POM and that 
the research community has a vital role to play in work that builds 
sustainable operations in the new era of intelligent manufacturing. The 
main objective of calling this special issue was thus to provide a forum 
for scholars, practitioners and thought leaders to critically study, eval-
uate, explore and explain the new models, new ways, new means and 
new forms of intelligent manufacturing that create impacts on opera-
tions sustainability. 


Based on the background presented above, we specified the thematic 
scope of the special issue with recommended topics that were particu-
larly relevant to the special issue and its remit. These topics and their 
respective focuses are listed in Table 1 below. 


Overall, the special issue was able to attract a total of 38 manuscript 
submissions, and 14 of which were selected after a thorough initial 
screening process and then sent out for double-blinded reviews. With the 
support of reviewers in their specialized field of expertise, eight papers 
have eventually been accepted for inclusion in this special issue. In the 
following section, we provide an overview of the accepted papers. In 
Section 3, we attempt to offer some guidelines and directions for future 
research pertaining to the special issue. Section 4 concludes the 
editorial. 


2. Overview of the special issue papers 


The papers comprising the special issue address the research theme 
of the initial call despite having their respective focuses from various 


angles. Table 2 lists the eight papers with the titles, authors, and main 
research focuses. They reflect a variety of new technologies in opera-
tions and supply chains, and their potential implications for sustain-
ability. In brief, Afshari, Searcy and Jaber’s work is primarily on additive 
manufacturing and eco-innovation drivers. Kouhizadeh, Saberi and Sar-
kis’s paper focuses on blockchain technology and the barriers to its 
adoption. Li, Dai and Cui’s research emphasizes digital technologies in 
Industry 4.0 and their impact on the economic and environmental di-
mensions of sustainability. Bai et al. provide a thorough evaluation of 
different Industry 4.0 technologies and their respective implications for 
different industries and the three pillars of sustainability. Shafiq, Ahmed 
and Mahmoodi’s study focuses on supply chain analytics and pays 
particular attention to the social aspect of sustainability. Wang et al. 
introduce a new technology for optimizing perishable food production 
with quality, time, and environmental considerations, whereas Li and 
Epureanu and Liu et al. have their focuses on different stages of supply 
chains, i.e. modular fleet optimization and vehicle routing problems, 
respectively. In the following paragraphs, we introduce each of the 
special issue papers. 


The paper by Afshari, Searcy and Jaber explores the role of eco- 
innovation drivers in promoting additive manufacturing (AM) in sup-
ply chains and offers a framework to examine how eco-innovation 
drivers could impact sustainable supply chains. To achieve their 
research objectives, the authors develop a mathematical optimization 
model to determine the optimal manufacturing process in simulated 
environments with a focus on drivers and an eco-innovation solution. 
The proposed framework is used to recommend the best location choices 
for establishing the desired supply chains with cost and pollution 


Table 1 
Recommended topics in the special issue call for papers.  


Topics Main research focus 


Studies on the impact of new models, new 
means and new forms of intelligent 
manufacturing on operations 
sustainability. 


Impact of intelligent 
manufacturing on operations 
sustainability 


Studies on intelligent manufacturing 
ecology, with the characteristics of 
ubiquitous network technology, cross- 
border integration, autonomous 
intelligent, product lifecycle intelligent 
design technology and mass innovation, 
etc. 


Intelligent manufacturing ecology 


Comparative studies on different types of 
new technologies in manufacturing and 
their impacts on operations 
sustainability. 


Different types of new 
technologies 


New technologies in manufacturing and 
their implications for sustainability in 
different cultural and regional contexts, 
including developing countries and 
SMEs. 


Implications for different cultural 
and regional contexts 


Impact of new technologies in 
manufacturing on various stages of a 
product lifecycle and its implications for 
sustainability. 


Impact on different stages of a 
product lifecycle 


Applications of new technologies in 
operations and supply chain 
management for environmental and 
social improvement. 


Environmental and social 
improvement 


New theory development to explain the 
implications of new technologies in 
manufacturing for sustainability at the 
firm, inter-firm, and supply network 
levels. 


New theory development  


Table 2 
The eight papers included in the special issue.  


Title Authors Main research focus 


The Role of Eco-Innovation 
Drivers in Promoting 
Additive Manufacturing in 
Supply Chains 


Afshari, Searcy 
and Jaber 


Additive manufacturing; eco- 
innovation drivers 


Blockchain Technology and 
the Sustainable Supply 
Chain: Theoretically 
Exploring Adoption 
Barriers 


Kouhizadeh, 
Saberi and 
Sarkis 


Blockchain technology; 
adoption barriers 


The impact of digital 
technologies on economic 
and environmental 
performance in the 
context of Industry 4.0: A 
moderated mediation 
model 


Li, Dai and Cui Digital technologies; Industry 
4.0; supply chain platforms; 
Chinese manufacturing 
context 


Industry 4.0 Technologies 
Assessment: A 
Sustainability Perspective 


Bai et al. Industry 4.0; assessment of 
different I4.0 technologies 


Impact of Supply Chain 
Analytics and Customer 
Pressure for Ethical 
Conduct on Socially 
Responsible Practices and 
Performance: An 
Exploratory Study 


Shafiq, Ahmed 
and Mahmoodi 


Supply chain analytics; social 
sustainability; U.S. 
manufacturing context 


Coordinating quality, time, 
and carbon emissions in 
perishable food 
production: A new 
technology integrating 
GERT and the Bayesian 
approach 


Wang et al. Food quality and 
environmental sustainability; 
GERT and Bayesian approach 


An Agent-based Approach to 
Optimizing Modular 
Vehicle Fleet Operation 


Li and Epureanu Modular fleet optimization; 
Agent-based modelling 


Inventory Sharing Strategy 
and Optimization for 
Reusable Transport Items 


Liu et al. Vehicle routing problems; 
inventory sharing; reusable 
transport items;  


Y. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      










International Journal of Production Economics 229 (2020) 107889


3


analyses. Some of the key findings of their research include:  


• Energy prices play a dominant role in driving the adoption of AM in 
supply chains.  


• Market share is not a key driver that promotes AM adoption in supply 
chains.  


• The processing and manufacturing times for AM technologies are 
longer than those for subtractive manufacturing (SM), and thus, AM 
could be facilitated by intense market competition and stringent 
regulations and standards to support the rights of end customers.  


• At the current level of technology, “economies of scale” is applicable 
for SM while AM still needs technology improvement to benefit from 
it. However, in very small-scale markets, AM is more suitable for 
supply chains than SM considering the total cost, environmental 
impact, and customer satisfaction. 


The authors conclude that the adoption of AM in supply chains is a 
strategic and long-term decision. However, moving towards AM-enabled 
supply chains will likely become mandatory rather than optional over 
time as new technologies offer the potential for improved customer 
satisfaction and customization of products and services. The proposed 
framework provides decision-makers with the key drivers to adopt AM 
in supply chains at minimum cost and environmental impact. 


In their work, Kouhizadeh, Saberi and Sarkis theoretically study the 
barriers for adopting blockchain technology in supply chains for sus-
tainability purposes. Blockchain technology includes several advantages 
such as that it can enable transparent, secure, decentralized ledgers, 
smart contracts and reliable networks for sustainable supply chain 
management (SSCM). However, the adoption rate has not been over-
whelming. The authors first utilize the Force Filed and TOE (i.e. tech-
nology, organization, and environment) theoretical lens to investigate a 
comprehensive set of barriers from the relevant literature, and then 
adopt Decision Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL) to 
explore the relationships and prominence of those barriers with inputs 
from academic and professional experts. Based on their study findings, 
the authors arrive at a list of theoretical propositions: 


P1. Stakeholder theory can expand the usability and understanding 
of the TOE framework. Different stakeholders will perceive underlying 
factors differently, especially in emergent and complex technological 
and organizational relationships. 


P2. Organizational barriers mediate the relationship between tech-
nological barriers and supply chain barriers in blockchain adoption for 
sustainable supply chain management. 


P3. Blockchain and SSCM accessibility is reduced through maturity 
and security concerns within the technology TOE dimension. Lack of 
accessibility reduces blockchain in SSCM adoption. 


P4. Blockchain adoption in supply chains requires tangible and 
intangible resources. However, intangible resources play a more 
important role in successful adoption. 


P5. Blockchain adoption for sustainable supply chains will positively 
relate to relational rents and serve as motivation to decrease supply 
chain barriers. Relational rents are influenced by building sustainability- 
based relation-specific assets, improved knowledge sharing routines, 
building complementary sustainable supply chain resources, and 
embedding effective sustainability governance structures. 


The research by Li, Dai and Cui investigates how digital technologies 
such as the Internet of Things (IoTs), cloud computing, and big data 
analytics might impact economic and environmental performance in the 
new era of Industry 4.0. The authors propose a moderated mediation 
model using digital supply chain platforms as the mediator and envi-
ronmental dynamism as the moderator and tested the model using data 
from a survey of Chinese manufacturing firms. The results reveal that 
digital technologies can positively influence both economic and envi-
ronmental performance. The adoption of digital technologies can facil-
itate the establishment of supply chain platforms in the context of 
industry 4.0. In addition, the mediating role of digital supply chain 


platforms is confirmed in the test, which can be used to explain the 
relationship between digital technologies and sustainability perfor-
mance. The authors argue that the effectiveness of digital technologies 
should be realized through the establishment of digital supply chain 
platforms. The study findings also reveal that environmental dynamism 
moderates the indirect effect of digital technologies for Industry 4.0 on 
economic and environmental performance through digital supply chain 
platforms. Based on the finding, the authors claim that, to realize better 
economic and environmental performance, manufacturing firms should 
not only rely on internal information processing capabilities gained 
through digital technologies, but also make the utmost digital supply 
chain platforms to access more information externally, especially in a 
dynamic environment. 


In their paper, Bai et al. provide a thorough assessment of different 
Industry 4.0 technologies based on their sustainable performance and 
application. In order to achieve their study objectives, the authors pro-
pose a framework incorporating the United Nations Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals and also develop a hybrid multi-situation decision method 
integrating hesitant fuzzy set, cumulative prospect theory and VIKOR. 
Then, they apply the method in a case study with data derived from a 
report of the World Economic Forum. The key findings include that 
mobile technology has the greatest impact on sustainability in all in-
dustries, whereas nanotechnology, mobile technology, simulation and 
drones have the highest impact on sustainability in the automotive, 
electronics, food & beverage, and textile-apparel-footwear industries, 
respectively. With respect to the three sustainability dimensions, 
blockchain and mobile technology seem to have the highest impact on 
the economic perspective; sensors and actuators followed by AI, big data 
analytics and cloud technology have the highest impact on the envi-
ronmental sustainability dimension; whereas cloud technology and big 
data analytics seem to impact mostly the social sustainability dimension. 
According to their study results, the authors conclude that the sustain-
ability impact of Industry 4.0 varies significantly with regard to specific 
technology, industry, and sustainability dimension considered. 


The paper by Shafiq, Ahmed and Mahmoodi focuses on the social 
aspect of sustainability and explores the role of supply chain analytics 
capabilities and customer pressure for ethical conduct in the adoption of 
socially responsible practices by suppliers. To test their conceptual 
model, the authors administer a large-scale survey to purchasing and 
supply chain professionals in the U.S. manufacturing industry. Their 
results reveal that customer pressure for social responsibility can force 
suppliers to focus more on creating transparent supply chains as 
compared to employees’ wellbeing. However, employee-focused social 
practices can have a better impact on firms’ financial performance. As 
noted by the authors, this creates a dilemma and complexity in man-
aging socially responsible supply chains as stakeholder demands are not 
always aligned with corporate goals. The authors claim that investing in 
analytics capabilities might help navigate some of this complexity, as 
analytics capability was found to be complementary to customer pres-
sure for ethical conduct in adopting socially responsible practices. In 
addition, the results also suggest that supply chain analytics capability 
can lead to higher financial performance. The authors further posit that 
as the complexity of supply management increases, both analytics ca-
pabilities and the adoption of socially responsible practices are required. 
Based on stakeholder theory and the resource-based view (RBV), the 
study makes a contribution to the literature by investigating the link 
between supply chain analytics capability and the adoption of socially 
responsible practices by a firm. 


In their paper, Wang et al. propose a new technology combining 
Graphic Evaluation and Review Technique (GERT) and Bayesian 
approach for quality improvement activities (QIAs) in perishable food 
production. The novel decision-making technology takes into account 
the trade-offs among three metrics of quality, time, and carbon emis-
sions, and can handle both the dynamics and uncertainties of the three 
metrics resulting from the QIA decision making. The authors use bottled 
milk production as an example and further present a case study on a 


Y. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


































International Journal of Production Economics 229 (2020) 107889


4


well-known Chinese dairy manufacturing firm. Based on their study 
findings, they arrive at the conclusion that the proposed new technology 
can help 1) mitigate uncertainty but maintain the random nature of food 
production, 2) reinforce the stability of the probabilistic change of the 
three metrics by increasing of the QIA-trail size, 3) visualize the optimal 
trade-offs among the three metrics from different angels of view, and 4) 
figure out individualized sustainable quality management plans which 
are node-oriented and objective-oriented. This study highlights the 
advantage of implanting the Bayesian approach into the GERT for 
effective decision-making in food-production sustainability 
management. 


The study by Li and Epureanu develops an agent-based approach to 
optimizing modular vehicle fleet operation. As noted by the authors, 
modularity facilitates assembly, disassembly, and the reconfiguration 
(ADR) of vehicles, which are beneficial in promoting fleet adaptability 
and life cycle cost savings. Given deterministic filed demands with op-
erations stochasticity, the authors compare the performance of a 
modular fleet to a conventional fleet in equivalent operation strategies 
and also compare the fleet performance when driven by heuristic rules 
or optimization. Their findings suggest that fleet modularity can reduce 
the total resources supplied without significant loss of fleet readiness 
and that the benefits of fleet modularity can be amplified through a real- 
time optimized operations strategy. Based on their study findings, the 
authors recommend that for low-demand vehicles, high commonality is 
suggested to increase the pooling effect and reduce resource usage; 
whereas for high-demand vehicles, the design should reduce the ADR 
action time. 


The research conducted by Liu et al. takes a unique angle by exam-
ining the use of reusable transport items (RTI) in packaging for creating 
economic, environmental and social benefits. Based on a case study of a 
leading RTI pooling company in China, the authors propose an inventory 
sharing strategy in the daily planning of distribution and the routing 
problem. A decision support framework is developed to optimize the 
firm’s distribution and dispatching vehicle routes using a two-stage so-
lution process. Their results indicate that the company can gain 
noticeable reductions in the transport costs and total travelled distance, 
which can bring about significant environmental and social advantages. 
Their research offers useful insights into the perspective of the RTI 
pooler as a sustainable solution to the increasing packaging wastes 
generated from the ever-growing globalized supply chains. 


3. Directions for future research 


These papers in our special issue make valuable contributions to the 
literature on the implications of various new technologies for sustain-
ability in operations and supply chain management. It is clear that these 
new technologies are playing an increasingly important role in today’s 
manufacturing, and their potential impact on sustainability should not 
be neglected. Based on our observations together with the knowledge 
advanced by the contributing papers, we attempt to offer some di-
rections for future research at the intersection of digitization and sus-
tainable operations and supply chain management: 


First, regarding research scope, most existing research focuses on one 
or two technologies, and on certain stages of a supply chain. We believe 
that it could be interesting and potentially more useful to take a more 
holistic approach in addressing sustainability issues, for example, an 
emphasis on product lifecycle, Industry 4.0 ecology, new technologies 
for fostering business ecosystems, etc. Moreover, collaboration among 
manufacturing enterprises and information technology providers/plat-
forms demands further in-depth studies. For example, whether and how 
data-centric digital platforms can facilitate sustainable supply chain 
management for manufacturing enterprises? For manufacturing enter-
prises, how to balance environmental, social and financial gains? For 
information technology providers/platforms, they may need significant 
investment for new technology development, but how much of such 
investment could and should be covered by benefited manufacturing 


enterprises? In line with these questions, the sustainability effects of the 
new technologies stay rather open and should be explored further. 


Second, looking at the theoretical foundations, the accepted papers 
have adopted different theoretical lenses in their research, including 
stakeholder theory, information processing theory, the RBV and TOE 
theories. These theories provide a solid foundation for developing the 
conceptual models, leading to interesting findings. In future studies, 
researchers are encouraged to adopt more useful and relevant theories in 
their research, either applying old theories in the new contexts or in an 
attempt to extend the existing ones. In this emerging era of Industry 4.0 
and smart manufacturing, there could be chances to even explore and 
develop new theories that are particular useful for sustainability 
research, which is certainly worth considering. While full theories take a 
lot of time and effort to develop, conceptual framework combining 
different aspects and looking at the related causalities should be an in-
termediate step for such developments. 


Third, regarding research methodology, we have seen that different 
methods have been adopted in prior research such as a survey that 
contains subjective measures and mathematical modelling with 
different scenarios. Only few researchers seem to have attempted to 
explore the real impact of new technologies through case study based 
analysis. We believe future research that uses the case study method 
could potentially offer useful insights into this research agenda, com-
plementing other research methods. Game modelling can also be used to 
explore dynamic relationships between a manufacturing enterprise and 
a new technology provider/platform. Simulation may be also applied to 
examine environmental and economic gains under different scenarios 
using different new technologies. Yet, this is not a complete list of 
methods and it should rather not be seen as a complete list. It will be 
beneficial to employ a wide range of methods, thereby enhancing the 
diversity of approaches and contributing to future insights. 


Fourth, regarding research findings, it seems that we have mainly 
focused on the pros of new technologies on sustainability in operations 
and supply chain but so far rarely addressed the cons of new technolo-
gies that they may bring along, especially from the social perspective. A 
simple example might be shifting production (back) to developed 
countries by employing 3D printing, thereby laying off staff members in 
low income countries. We argue that this overlooked arena certainly 
deserves more attention from the POM’s community in addressing the 
future sustainability challenges. Moreover, investments (costs) and 
benefits may happen at the different stages of a supply chain. For 
example, if a component/part producer installs some new tracking 
technologies, the producer can benefit by tracking these components 
during product production and use, or even for management of the end- 
of-life product. This way, the parts might return for refurbishment or 
recycling, contributing to a circular economy. Related research ques-
tions are still open, such as: Would the digital technologies allow to 
overcome issues in tracking and tracing of products? What would the 
sustainability implications of such solutions be? Can it be implemented 
in an economical manner obeying environmental and social demands? 
How would the relationships among stakeholders along a supply chain 
to fairly cover cost and share benefits be coordinated? 


Last but not least, as supply chains are getting longer and more 
complex, it becomes more challenging to manage the associated risks 
due to for instance natural disasters and geopolitical uncertainties. We 
have witnessed significant supply chain disruptions during crises, 
especially during the covid-19 pandemic, giving rise to supply shortages 
of essential items and humanitarian crisis in lots of places around the 
globe. Whether the new technologies have a critical role to play in 
mitigating the risks and combatting these crises? In addition, as orga-
nizations are using more and more advanced new technologies, can they 
develop better and stronger capabilities for responsiveness, resilience, 
and restoration of their operations and supply chains during and after 
disasters? Turning the argument on supply chain complexity around, 
this also triggers the question on whether shorter and more local supply 
chains would allow to manage environmental and social demands in a 


Y. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      






































































International Journal of Production Economics 229 (2020) 107889


5


sound manner and improving supply chain resilience. These can be very 
meaningful research questions to be addressed for future research 
agenda. 


4. Conclusion 


In this editorial, we have introduced the theme and aim of our special 
issue, and in particular, the eight papers that have been accepted for 
publication. These manuscripts offer useful insights for both academics 
and practitioners into the imperative sustainability research agenda. 
The findings from these papers make valuable contributions both in 
theory and practice by uncovering the implications of new technologies 
for sustainability in operations and supply chain management. Although 
these contributing papers focus on a good variety of relevant topics and 
perspectives, they are far from offering a whole picture of the entire 
research stream concerning the objectives of the special issue. Therefore, 
we have offered our views in pointing out future research directions, 
with a hope to simulate continued interests from the POM community to 
conduct meaningful and insightful research concerning new technolo-
gies and their implications for sustainability. 


Acknowledgments 


The guest editors of this special issue wish to thank all the reviewers 
for their valuable time and efforts in reviewing the papers. We are also 
grateful to the journal editor, Professor Stefan Minner and the editorial 
team for accepting and hosting our special issue at their prestigious 
journal. Finally, we’d like to thank all the authors who made sub-
missions to the special issue for consideration. 


References 


Braganza, A., Brooks, L., Nepelski, D., Ali, M., Moro, R., 2017. Resource management in 
big data initiatives: processes and dynamic capabilities. J. Bus. Res. 70, 328–337. 


Chen, H., Chiang, R.H.L., Storey, V.C., 2012. Busines Intelligence and analytics: from big 
data to big impact. MIS Q. 36 (4), 24. 


Dirican, C., 2015. The impacts of robotics, artificial intelligence on business and 
economics. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 195, 564–573. 


Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S.F., Childe, S.J., Hazen, B., 
Akter, S., 2017. Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational 
performance. J. Bus. Res. 70, 308–317. 


Kache, F., Seuring, S., 2017. Challenges and opportunities of digital information at the 
intersection of Big Data Analytics and supply chain management. Int. J. Oper. Prod. 
Manag. 37 (1), 10–36. 


Koh, L., Orzes, G., Jia, F., Jeff), 2019. The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): 
technologies disruption on operations and supply chain management. Int. J. Oper. 
Prod. Manag. 39, 817–828. 


Li, B., Hou, B., Yu, W., Lu, X., Yang, C., 2017. Applications of artificial intelligence in 
intelligent manufacturing: a review. Frontiers of Information Technology & 
Electronic Engineering 18 (1), 86–96. 


Makridakis, S., 2017. The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: its impact 
on society and firms. Futures 90, 46–60. 


Nozaki, N., Konno, E., Sato, M., Sakairi, M., Shibuya, T., Kanazawa, Y., Georgescu, S., 
2017. Application of artificial intelligence technology in product design. Fujitsu Sci. 
Tech. J. 53 (4), 43–51. 


Pan, Y., 2016. Heading toward artificial intelligence 2.0. Engineering 2 (4), 409–413. 
Wamba, S.F., Ngai, E.W.T., Riggins, F., Akter, S., 2017. Transforming operations and 


production management using big data and business analytics: future research 
directions. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 37 (1), 2–9. 


Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W.T., Papadopoulos, T., 2016. Big data analytics in 
logistics and supply chain management: certain investigations for research and 
applications. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 176, 98–110. 


Wuest, T., Weimer, D., Irgens, C., Thoben, K.-D., 2016. Machine learning in 
manufacturing: advantages, challenges, and applications. Production & 
Manufacturing Research 4 (1), 23–45. 


Zhang, X., Chan, F.T.S., Adamatzky, A., Mahadevan, S., Yang, H., Zhang, Z., Deng, Y., 
2017. An intelligent physarum solver for supply chain network design under profit 
maximization and oligopolistic competition. Int. J. Prod. Res. 55 (1), 244–263. 


Zhong, R.Y., Newman, S.T., Huang, G.Q., Lan, S., 2016. Big Data for supply chain 
management in the service and manufacturing sectors: challenges, opportunities, 
and future perspectives. Comput. Ind. Eng. 101, 572–591. 


Y. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      



http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref1





http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref1

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref2

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref3

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref4

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref5

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref6

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref7

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref8

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref9

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref10

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref11

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref12

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref13

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref14

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref15

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0925-5273(20)30252-8/sref15


